

2 Introduction
Signals and Systems1

2.1 What is this book for?
The purpose of this book is to begin down the long and winding road of Electrical Engineering.
Previous books on electric circuits have laid a general groundwork, but again: that is not
what electrical engineers usually do with their time. Very complicated integrated circuits
exist for most applications that can be picked up at a local circuit shop or hobby shop
for pennies, and there is no sense creating new ones. As such, this book will most likely
spend little or no time discussing actual circuit implementations of any of the structures
discussed. Also, this book will not stumble through much of the complicated mathematics,
instead opting to simply point out and tabulate the relevant results. What this book will
do, however, is attempt to provide some insight into a field of study that is considered very
foreign and arcane to most outside observers. This book will be a theoretical foundation that
future books will build upon. This book will likely not discuss any specific implementations
(no circuits, transceivers, filters, etc...), as these materials will be better handled in later
books.

2.2 Who is this book for?
This book is designed to accompany a second year of study in electrical engineering at the
college level. However, students who are not currently enrolled in an electrical engineering
curriculum may also find some valuable and interesting information here. This book requires
the reader to have a previous knowledge of differential calculus, and assumes familiarity
with integral calculus as well. Barring previous knowledge, a concurrent course of study in
integral calculus could accompany reading this book, with mixed results. Using Laplace
Transforms, this book will avoid differential equations completely, and therefore no prior
knowledge of that subject is needed. Having a prior knowledge of other subjects such as
physics (wave dynamics, energy, forces, fields) will provide a deeper insight into this subject,
although it is not required. Also, having a mathematical background in probability, statistics,
or random variables will provide a deeper insight into the mechanics of noise signals, but
that also is not required.

1

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

5

Introduction

2.3 What will this book cover?
This book is going to cover the theory of LTI systems and signals. This subject will form
the fundamental basis for several other fields of study, including signal processing, Digital
Signal Processing2 , Communication Systems3 , and Control Systems4 . This book will
provide the basic theory of LTI systems and mathematical modeling of signals. We will also
introduce the notion of a stochastic, or random, process. Random processes, such as noise
or interference, are so common in the studies of these systems that it's impossible to discuss
the practical use of filter systems without first discussing noise processes. Later sections will
introduce some more advanced topics, such as digital signals and systems, and filters. This
book will not discuss these topics at length, however, preferring to direct the reader to more
comprehensive books on these subjects. This book will attempt, so far as is possible, to
provide not only the materials but also discussions about the importance and relevance of
those materials. Because the information in this book plays a fundamental role in preparing
the reader for advanced discussions in other books.

2.4 Where to go from here
Once a basic knowledge of signals and systems has been learned, the reader can then take
one of several paths of study.
• Readers interested in the use of electric signals for long-distance communications can read
Communication Systems5 and Communication Networks6 . This path will culminate in a
study of Data Coding Theory7 .
• Readers more interested in the analysis and processing of signals would likely be more
interested in reading about Signal Processing8 and Digital Signal Processing9 . These
books will focus primarily on the "signals".
• Readers who are more interested in the use of LTI systems to exercise control over systems
will be more interested in Control Systems10 . This book will focus primarily on the
"systems".
All three branches of study are going to share certain techniques and foundations, so many
readers may find benefit in trying to follow the different paths simultaneously.

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

6

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital_Signal_Processing
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Communication_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Communication_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Communication_Networks
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Data_Coding_Theory
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital_Signal_Processing
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control_Systems

3 MATLAB
Signals and Systems1

3.1 What is MATLAB?
MATLAB - MATrix LABoratory is an industry standard tool in engineering applications.
Electrical Engineers, working on topics related to this book will often use MATLAB to
help with modeling. For more information on programming MATLAB, see MATLAB
Programming2 .

3.2 Obtaining MATLAB
MATLAB itself is a relatively expensive piece of software. It is available for a fee from the
Mathworks website.

3.3 MATLAB Clones
There are, however, free alternatives to MATLAB. These alternatives are frequently called
"MATLAB Clones", although some of them do not mirror the syntax of MATLAB. The
most famous example is Octave. Here are some resources if you are interested in obtaining
Octave:
• SPM/MATLAB3
• Octave Programming Tutorial4
• MATLAB Programming/Differences between Octave and MATLAB5
• "Scilab / Scicoslab"6

1
2
3
4
5
6

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/SPM/MATLAB
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Octave_Programming_Tutorial
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming/Differences_between_Octave_and_MATLAB
http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scilab

7

MATLAB

3.4 MATLAB Template
This book will make use of the {{ MATLAB CMD7 }} template, that will create a note to the
reader that MATLAB has a command to handle a particular task. In the individual chapters,
this book will not discuss MATLAB outright, nor will it explain those commands. However,
there will be some chapters at the end of the book that will demonstrate how to perform
some of these calculations, and how to use some of these analysis tools in MATLAB.

7

8

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Template:MATLAB_CMD

4 Signal and System Basics
4.1 Signals
What is a signal? Of course, we know that a signal can be a rather abstract notion,
such as a flashing light on our car's front bumper (turn signal), or an umpire's gesture
indicating that a pitch went over the plate during a baseball game (a strike signal). One
of the definitions of signal in the Merrian-Webster dictionary is: "A detectable physical
quantity or impulse (as a voltage, current, or magnetic field strength) by which messages or
information can be transmitted." or "A signal is a function of independent variables that
carry some information." "A signal is a physical quantity that varies with time,space or any
other independent variable.by which information can be conveyed" These are the types of
signals which will be of interest in this book. We will focus on two broad classes of signals,
discrete-time and continuous-time. We will consider discrete-time signals later. For now, we
will focus our attention on continuous-time signals. Fortunately, continuous-time signals have
a very convenient mathematical representation. We represent a continuous-time signal as a
function x(t) of the real variable t. Here, t represents continuous time and we can assign
to t any unit of time we deem appropriate (seconds, hours, years, etc.). We do not have to
make any particular assumptions about x(t) such as "boundedness" (a signal is bounded if it
has a finite value). Some of the signals we will work with are in fact, not bounded (i.e. they
take on an infinite value). However most of the continuous-time signals we will deal with
in the real world are bounded. Signal: a function representing some variable that contains
some information about the behavior of a natural or artificial system. Signals are one part
of the whole. Signals are meaningless without systems to interpret them, and systems
are useless without signals to process. Signal: the energy (a traveling wave) that carries
some information. Signal example: an electrical circuit signal may represent a time-varying
voltage measured across a resistor. A signal can be represented as a function x(t) of an
independent variable t which usually represents time. If t is a continuous variable, x(t) is a
continuous-time signal, and if t is a discrete variable, defined only at discrete values of t,
then x(t) is a discrete-time signal. A discrete-time signal is often identified as a sequence of
numbers, denoted by x[n], where n is an integer. Signal: the representation of information.

4.2 Systems
A System, in the sense of this book, is any physical set of components that takes a signal,
and produces a signal. In terms of engineering, the input is generally some electrical signal
X, and the output is another electrical signal(response) Y. However, this may not always be
the case. Consider a household thermostat, which takes input in the form of a knob or a
switch, and in turn outputs electrical control signals for the furnace. A main purpose of this
book is to try and lay some of the theoretical foundation for future dealings with electrical

9

Signal and System Basics
signals. Systems will be discussed in a theoretical sense only.

Signals and Systems1

4.3 Basic Functions
Often times, complex signals can be simplified as linear combinations of certain basic
functions (a key concept in Fourier analysis). These basic functions, which are useful to the
field of engineering, receive little or no coverage in traditional mathematics classes. These
functions will be described here, and studied more in the following chapters.

4.4 Unit Step Function
The unit step function and the impulse function are considered to be fundamental functions
in engineering, and it is strongly recommended that the reader becomes very familiar with
both of these functions.

1

10

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

Unit Step Function

Figure 2

Unit Step Function

11

Signal and System Basics

Figure 3

Shifted Unit Step function

The unit step function, also known as the Heaviside function2 , is defined as such:
u(t) =



 0,

if t < 0
1,
if t
>0

 1 , if t = 0
2

Sometimes, u(0) is given other values, usually either 0 or 1. For many applications, it is
irrelevant what the value at zero is. u(0) is generally written as undefined.

4.4.1 Derivative
The unit step function is level in all places except for a discontinuity at t = 0. For this
reason, the derivative of the unit step function is 0 at all points t, except where t = 0.
Where t = 0, the derivative of the unit step function is infinite. The derivative of a unit step
function is called an impulse function. The impulse function will be described in more
detail next.
2

12

http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heaviside_step_function

Impulse Function

4.4.2 Integral
The integral of a unit step function is computed as such:
(

)

0,
if t < 0
Rt
= tu(t)
−∞ u(s)ds =
0 ds = t, if t ≥ 0

Rt

In other words, the integral of a unit step is a "ramp" function. This function is 0 for all
values that are less than zero, and becomes a straight line at zero with a slope of +1.

4.4.3 Time Inversion
if we want to reverse the unit step function, we can flip it around the y axis as such: u(-t).
With a little bit of manipulation, we can come to an important result:
u(−t) = 1 − u(t)

4.4.4 Other Properties
Here we will list some other properties of the unit step function:
• u(∞) = 1
• u(−∞) = 0
• u(t) + u(−t) = 1
These are all important results, and the reader should be familiar with them.

4.5 Impulse Function
An impulse function is a special function that is often used by engineers to model certain
events. An impulse function is not realizable, in that by definition the output of an impulse
function is infinity at certain values. An impulse function is also known as a "delta function",
although there are different types of delta functions that each have slightly different properties.
Specifically, this unit-impulse function is known as the Dirac delta function. The term
"Impulse Function" is unambiguous, because there is only one definition of the term "Impulse".
Let's start by drawing out a rectangle function, D(t), as such:

13

Signal and System Basics

Figure 4

We can define this rectangle in terms of the unit step function:
D(t) = A1 [u(t + A/2) − u(t − A/2)]
Now, we want to analyze this rectangle, as A becomes infinitesimally small. We can define
this new function, the delta function, in terms of this rectangle:
δ(t) = limA→0 A1 [u(t + A/2) − u(t − A/2)]
We can similarly define the delta function piecewise, as such:
1. δ(t) = 0 for t 6= 0.
2. δ(t)
> 0 for t = 0.
R∞
3. −∞ δ(t)dt = 1.
Although, this definition is less rigorous than the previous definition.

4.5.1 Integration
From its definition it follows that the integral of the impulse function is just the step function:
R

δ(t)dt = u(t)

Thus, defining the derivative of the unit step function as the impulse function is justified.

4.5.2 Shifting Property
Furthermore, for an integrable function f:
R∞

−∞ δ(t − A)f (t)dt = f (A)

14

Sinc Function
This is known as the shifting property (also known as the sifting property or the
sampling property) of the delta function; it effectively samples the value of the function
f, at location A. The delta function has many uses in engineering, and one of the most
important uses is to sample a continuous function into discrete values. Using this property,
we can extract a single value from a continuous function by multiplying with an impulse,
and then integrating.

4.5.3 Types of Delta
There are a number of different functions that are all called "delta functions". These functions
generally all look like an impulse, but there are some differences. Generally, this book uses
the term "delta function" to refer to the Dirac Delta Function.
• w:Dirac delta function3
• w:Kronecker delta4

4.6 Sinc Function
There is a particular form that appears so frequently in communications engineering, that
we give it its own name. This function is called the "Sinc function" and is discussed below:
The Sinc function is defined in the following manner:
sinc(x) = sin(πx)
if x 6= 0
πx
and
sinc(0) = 1
The value of sinc(x) is defined as 1 at x = 0, since
limx→0 sinc(x) = 1.
This fact can be proven by noting that for x near 0,
1 > sinx(x) > cos (x).
Then, since cos(0) = 1, we can apply the Squeeze Theorem5 to show that the sinc function
approaches one as x goes to zero. Thus, defining sinc(0) to be 1 makes the sinc function
continuous. Also, the Sinc function approaches zero as x goes towards infinity, with the
envelope of sinc(x) tapering off as 1/x.

4.7 Rect Function
The Rect Function is a function which produces a rectangular-shaped pulse with a width of
1 centered at t = 0. The Rect function pulse also has a height of 1. The Sinc function and
3
4
5

http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirac_delta_function
http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kronecker_delta
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Calculus/Limits/An_Introduction_to_Limits#The_Squeeze_
Theorem

15

Signal and System Basics
the rectangular function form a Fourier transform pair. A Rect function can be written in
the form:
rect



t−X
Y



where the pulse is centered at X and has width Y. We can define the impulse function above
in terms of the rectangle function by centering the pulse at zero (X = 0), setting it's height
to 1/A and setting the pulse width to A, which approaches zero:
δ(t) = limA→0 A1 rect



t−0
A



We can also construct a Rect function out of a pair of unit step functions:
rect



t−X
Y



= u(t − X + Y /2) − u(t − X − Y /2)

Here, both unit step functions are set a distance of Y/2 away from the center point of (t X).

4.8 Square Wave
A square wave is a series of rectangular pulses. Here are some examples of square waves:

16

Figure 5
These two square waves have the same
amplitude, but the second has a lower
frequency. We can see that the period
of the second is approximately twice as
large as the first, and therefore that the
frequency of the second is about half the
frequency of the first.

Figure 6

Figure 7

Figure 8

LTI Systems

These two square waves have the same
frequency and the same peak-to-peak
amplitude, but the second wave has no
DC offset. Notice how the second wave
is centered on the x axis, while the first
wave is completely above the x axis.

Signals and Systems6
There are many tools available to analyze a system in the time domain, although many of
these tools are very complicated and involved. Nonetheless, these tools are invaluable for
use in the study of linear signals and systems, so they will be covered here.
This book contains mathematical formulae that look better rendered as
PNG7 .

4.9 LTI Systems
This page will contain the definition of a LTI system and this will be used to motivate the
definition of convolution as the output of a LTI system in the next section. To begin with
a system has to be defined and the LTI properties have to be listed. Then, for a given
input it can be shown (in this section or the following) that the output of a LTI system is a
convolution of the input and the system's impulse response, thus motivating the definition
of convolution. Consider a system for which an input of xi (t) results in an output of yi (t)
respectively for i = 1, 2.

4.9.1 Linearity
There are 3 requirements for linearity. A function must satisfy all 3 to be called "linear".
1. Additivity: An input of x3 (t) = x1 (t) + x2 (t) results in an output of y3 (t) = y1 (t) +
y2 (t).
2. Homogeneity: An input of ax1 results in an output of ay1
3. If x(t) = 0, y(t) = 0.
"Linear" in this sense is not the same word as is used in conventional algebra or geometry.
Specifically, linearity in signals applications has nothing to do with straight lines. Here is a
small example:
y(t) = x(t) + 5

6
7

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Wikibooks:Render_as_PNG

17

Signal and System Basics
This function is not linear, because when x(t) = 0, y(t) = 5 (fails requirement 3). This may
surprise people, because this equation is the equation for a straight line! Being linear is also
known in the literature as "satisfying the principle of superposition". Superposition is a
fancy term for saying that the system is additive and homogeneous. The terms linearity and
superposition can be used interchangably, but in this book we will prefer to use the term
linearity exclusively. We can combine the three requirements into a single equation: In a
linear system, an input of a1 x1 (t) + a2 x2 (t) results in an output of a1 y1 (t) + a2 y2 (t).

4.9.2 Additivity
A system is said to be additive if a sum of inputs results in a sum of outputs. To test for
additivity, we need to create two arbitrary inputs, x1 (t) and x2 (t). We then use these inputs
to produce two respective outputs:
y1 (t) = f (x1 (t))
y2 (t) = f (x2 (t))
Now, we need to take a sum of inputs, and prove that the system output is a sum of the
previous outputs:
y1 (t) + y2 (t) = f (x1 (t) + x2 (t))
If this final relationship is not satisfied for all possible inputs, then the system is not additive.

4.9.3 Homogeneity
Similar to additivity, a system is homogeneous if a scaled input (multiplied by a constant)
results in a scaled output. If we have two inputs to a system:
y1 (t) = f (x1 (t))
y2 (t) = f (x2 (t))
Where
x1 (t) = cx2 (t)
Where c is an arbitrary constant. If this is the case then the system is homogeneous if
y1 (t) = cy2 (t)
for any arbitrary c.

4.9.4 Time Invariance
If the input signal x(t) produces an output y(t) then any time shifted input, x(t + δ), results
in a time-shifted output y(t + δ). This property can be satisfied if the transfer function of
the system is not a function of time except expressed by the input and output.

18

LTI Systems

4.9.5 Example: Simple Time Invariance
To demonstrate how to determine if a system is time-invariant then consider the two systems:
• System A: y(t) = t x(t)
• System B: b(t) = 10x(t)
Since system A explicitly depends on t outside of x(t) and y(t) then it is time-variant.
System B, however, does not depend explicitly on t so it is time-invariant.

4.9.6 Example: Formal Proof
A more formal proof of why systems A & B from above are respectively time varying
and time-invariant is now presented. To perform this proof, the second definition of time
invariance will be used.
System A
Start with a delay of the input xd (t) = x(t + δ)

y(t) = t xd (t)
y1 (t) = t xd (t) = t x(t + δ)
Now delay the output by δ
y(t) = t x(t)
y2 (t) = y(t + δ) = (t + δ)x(t + δ)
Clearly y1 (t) 6= y2 (t), therefore the system is not time-invariant.
System B
Start with a delay of the input xd (t) = x(t + δ)

y(t) = 10 xd (t)
y1 (t) = 10 xd (t) = 10 x(t + δ)
Now delay the output by δ
y(t) = 10 x(t)
y2 (t) = y(t + δ) = 10 x(t + δ)
Clearly y1 (t) = y2 (t), therefore the system is time-invariant.

19

Signal and System Basics

4.10 Linear Time Invariant (LTI) Systems
The system is linear time-invariant (LTI) if it satisfies both the property of linearity and
time-invariance. This book will study LTI systems almost exclusively, because they are the
easiest systems to work with, and they are ideal to analyze and design.

4.11 Other Function Properties
Besides being linear, or time-invariant, there are a number of other properties that we can
identify in a function:

4.11.1 Memory
A system is said to have memory if the output from the system is dependent on past inputs
(or future inputs) to the system. A system is called memoryless if the output is only
dependent on the current input. Memoryless systems are easier to work with, but systems
with memory are more common in digital signal processing applications. A memory system
is also called a dynamic system whereas a memoryless system is called a static system.

4.11.2 Causality
Causality is a property that is very similar to memory. A system is called causal if it is
only dependent on past or current inputs. A system is called non-causal if the output of
the system is dependent on future inputs. Most of the practical systems are casual.

4.11.3 Stability
Stability is a very important concept in systems, but it is also one of the hardest function
properties to prove. There are several different criteria for system stability, but the most
common requirement is that the system must produce a finite output when subjected to
a finite input. For instance, if we apply 5 volts to the input terminals of a given circuit,
we would like it if the circuit output didn't approach infinity, and the circuit itself didn't
melt or explode. This type of stability is often known as "Bounded Input, Bounded Output"
stability, or BIBO. Studying BIBO stability is a relatively complicated course of study, and
later books on the Electrical Engineering bookshelf will attempt to cover the topic.

4.12 Linear Operators
Mathematical operators that satisfy the property of linearity are known as linear operators.
Here are some common linear operators:
1. Derivative
2. Integral

20

Impulse Response
3. Fourier Transform

4.12.1 Example: Linear Functions
Determine if the following two functions are linear or not:
∞
x(t)dt
1. y(t) = −∞
d
2. y(t) = dt x(t)

R

4.13 Impulse Response
4.13.1 Zero-Input Response
x(t) = u(t)
h(t) = e−x u(t)

4.13.2 Zero-State Response
4.13.3 Second-Order Solution
• Example8 . Finding the total response of a driven RLC circuit.

4.14 Convolution
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB9 command:
conv
Convolution (folding together) is a complicated operation involving integrating, multiplying,
adding, and time-shifting two signals together. Convolution is a key component to the rest
of the material in this book. The convolution a * b of two functions a and b is defined as
the function:
∞
(a ∗ b)(t) = −∞
a(τ )b(t − τ )dτ

R

The greek letter τ (tau) is used as the integration variable, because the letter t is already in
use. τ is used as a "dummy variable" because we use it merely to calculate the integral. In the
convolution integral, all references to t are replaced with τ, except for the -t in the argument
to the function b. Function b is time inverted by changing τ to -τ. Graphically, this process
moves everything from the right-side of the y axis to the left side and vice-versa. Time
inversion turns the function into a mirror image of itself. Next, function b is time-shifted by

8
9

http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Signals_and_Systems/Print_version/System_
Response&amp;action=edit&amp;redlink=1
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming

21

Signal and System Basics
the variable t. Remember, once we replace everything with τ, we are now computing in the
tau domain, and not in the time domain like we were previously. Because of this, t can be
used as a shift parameter. We multiply the two functions together, time shifting along the
way, and we take the area under the resulting curve at each point. Two functions overlap in
increasing amounts until some "watershed" after which the two functions overlap less and
less. Where the two functions overlap in the t domain, there is a value for the convolution. If
one (or both) of the functions do not exist over any given range, the value of the convolution
operation at that range will be zero. After the integration, the definite integral plugs the
variable t back in for remaining references of the variable τ, and we have a function of t
again. It is important to remember that the resulting function will be a combination of the
two input functions, and will share some properties of both.

4.14.1 Properties of Convolution
The convolution function satisfies certain conditions:
Commutativity
f ∗g = g∗f
Associativity
f ∗ (g ∗ h) = (f ∗ g) ∗ h
Distributivity
f ∗ (g + h) = (f ∗ g) + (f ∗ h)
Associativity With Scalar Multiplication
a(f ∗ g) = (af ) ∗ g = f ∗ (ag)
for any real (or complex) number a.
Differentiation Rule
(f ∗ g)0 = f 0 ∗ g = f ∗ g 0

4.14.2 Example 1
Find the convolution, z(t), of the following two signals, x(t) and y(t), by using (a) the integral
representation of the convolution equation and (b) muliplication in the Laplace domain.

22

Convolution

Figure 9
The signal y(t) is simply the Heaviside step10 , u(t). The signal x(t) is given by the following
infinite sinusoid, x0 (t), and windowing function, xw (t):

x0 (t) = sin(t)

xw (t) = u(t) − u(t − 2π)

Figure 10

10

http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heaviside_step

23

Signal and System Basics
Thus, the convolution we wish to perform is therefore:

z(t) = x(t) ∗ y(t)

z(t) = sin(t) [u(t) − u(t − 2π)] ∗ u(t)

z(t) = [sin(t)u(t) − sin(t)u(t − 2π)] ∗ u(t)
From the distributive law:

z(t) = sin(t)u(t) ∗ u(t) − sin(t)u(t − 2π) ∗ u(t)

Figure 11

4.15 Correlation
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB11 command:
xcorr

11

24

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming

Correlation
Akin to Convolution is a technique called "Correlation" that combines two functions in
the time domain into a single resultant function in the time domain. Correlation is not as
important to our study as convolution is, but it has a number of properties that will be
useful nonetheless. The correlation of two functions, g(t) and h(t) is defined as such:
∞
Rgh (t) = −∞
g(τ )h(t + τ )dτ

R

Where the capital R is the Correlation Operator, and the subscripts to R are the
arguments to the correlation operation. We notice immediately that correlation is similar
to convolution, except that we don't time-invert the second argument before we shift and
integrate. Because of this, we can define correlation in terms of convolution, as such:
Rgh (t) = g(t) ∗ h(−t)

4.15.1 Uses of Correlation
Correlation is used in many places because it demonstrates one important fact: Correlation
determines how much similarity there is between the two argument functions. The more the
area under the correlation curve, the more is the similarity between the two signals.

4.15.2 Autocorrelation
The term "autocorrelation" is the name of the operation when a function is correlated with
itself. The autocorrelation is denoted when both of the subscripts to the Correlation operator
are the same:
Rxx (t) = x(t) ∗ x(−t)
While it might seem ridiculous to correlate a function with itself, there are a number of uses
for autocorrelation that will be discussed later. Autocorrelation satisfies several important
properties:
1. The maximum value of the autocorrelation always occurs at t = 0. The function
always decreases (or stays constant) as t approaches infinity.
2. Autocorrelation is symmetric about the x axis.

4.15.3 Crosscorrelation
Cross correlation is every instance of correlation that is not considered "autocorrelation".
In general, crosscorrelation occurs when the function arguments to the correlation are not
equal. Crosscorrelation is used to find the similarity between two signals.

4.15.4 Example: RADAR
RADAR is a system that uses pulses of electromagnetic waves to determine the position of
a distant object. RADAR operates by sending out a signal, and then listening for echos. If
there is an object in range, the signal will bounce off that object and return to the RADAR
station. The RADAR will then take the cross correlation of two signals, the sent signal and

25

Signal and System Basics
the received signal. A spike in the cross correlation signal indicates that an object is present,
and the location of the spike indicates how much time has passed (and therefore how far
away the object is).

Signals and Systems12
Noise is an unfortunate phenomenon that is the greatest single enemy of an electrical
engineer. Without noise, digital communication rates would increase almost to infinity.

4.16 White Noise
White Noise, or Gaussian Noise is called white because it affects all the frequency components
of a signal equally. We don't talk about Frequency Domain analysis till a later chapter, but
it is important to know this terminology now.

4.17 Colored Noise
Colored noise is different from white noise in that it affects different frequency components
differently. For example, Pink Noise is random noise with an equal amount of power in each
frequency octave band.

4.18 White Noise and Autocorrelation
White Noise is completely random, so it would make intuitive sense to think that White
Noise has zero autocorrelation. As the noise signal is time shifted, there is no correlation
between the values. In fact, there is no correlation at all until the point where t = 0, and the
noise signal perfectly overlaps itself. At this point, the correlation spikes upward. In other
words, the autocorrelation of noise is an Impulse Function13 centered at the point t = 0.
C[n(t), n(t)] = δ(t)
Where n(t) is the noise signal.

4.19 Noise Power
Noise signals have a certain amount of energy associated with them. The more energy and
transmitted power that a noise signal has, the more interference the noise can cause in a
transmitted data signal. We will talk more about the power associated with noise in later
chapters.

12
13

26

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Signals_and_Systems/Engineering_Functions/
Impulse_Function&amp;action=edit&amp;redlink=1

Thermal Noise

4.20 Thermal Noise
Thermal noise is a fact of life for electronics. As components heat up, the resistance of
resistors change, and even the capacitance and inductance of energy storage elements can be
affected. This change amounts to noise in the circuit output. In this chapter, we will study
the effects of thermal noise. The thermal noise or white noise or Johnson noise is the random
noise which is generated in a resistor or the resistive component of a complex impedance
due to rapid and random motion of the molecules, atoms and electrons. According to the
kinetic theory of thermodynamics, the temperature of a particle denotes its internal kinetic
energy. This means that the temperature of a body expresses the rms value of the velocity
of motion of the particles in a body. As per this kinetic theory, the kinetic energy of these
particles becomes approximately zero (i.e. zero velocity) at absolute zero. Therefore, the
noise power produced in a resistor is proportional to its absolute temperature. Also the
noise power is proportional to the bandwidth over which the noise is measured. Therefore
the expression for maximum noise power output of a resistor may be given as:
Pn = k·T ·B
where
k is Boltzmann's constant
T is the absolute temperature, in Kelvin degrees
B is the bandwidth of interest, in Hertz.

Signals and Systems14

4.21 Periodic Signals
A signal is a periodic signal if it completes a pattern within a measurable time frame, called
a period and repeats that pattern over identical subsequent periods. The completion of
a full pattern is called a cycle. A period is defined as the amount of time (expressed in
seconds) required to complete one full cycle. The duration of a period represented by T,
may be different for each signal but it is constant for any given periodic signal.

4.22 Terminology
We will discuss here some of the common terminology that pertains to a periodic function.
Let g(t) be a periodic function satisfying g(t + T) = g(t) for all t.

4.22.1 Period
The period is the smallest value of T satisfying g(t + T) = g(t) for all t. The period is
defined so because if g(t + T) = g(t) for all t, it can be verified that g(t + T') = g(t) for all
14

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

27

Signal and System Basics
t where T' = 2T, 3T, 4T, ... In essence, it's the smallest amount of time it takes for the
function to repeat itself. If the period of a function is finite, the function is called "periodic".
Functions that never repeat themselves have an infinite period, and are known as "aperiodic
functions". The period of a periodic waveform will be denoted with a capital T. The period
is measured in seconds.

4.22.2 Frequency
The frequency of a periodic function is the number of complete cycles that can occur per
second. Frequency is denoted with a lower-case f. It is defined in terms of the period, as
follows:
f = T1
Frequency has units of hertz or cycle per second.

4.22.3 Radial Frequency
The radial frequency is the frequency in terms of radians. it is defined as follows:
ω = 2πf

4.22.4 Amplitude
The amplitude of a given wave is the value of the wave at that point. Amplitude is also
known as the "Magnitude" of the wave at that particular point. There is no particular
variable that is used with amplitude, although capital A, capital M and capital R are
common. The amplitude can be measured in different units, depending on the signal we
are studying. In an electric signal the amplitude will typically be measured in volts. In a
building or other such structure, the amplitude of a vibration could be measured in meters.

4.22.5 Continuous Signal
A continuous signal is a "smooth" signal, where the signal is defined over a certain range. For
example, a sine function is a continuous sample, as is an exponential function or a constant
function. A portion of a sine signal over a range of time 0 to 6 seconds is also continuous.
Examples of functions that are not continuous would be any discrete signal, where the value
of the signal is only defined at certain intervals.

4.22.6 DC Offset
A DC Offset is an amount by which the average value of the periodic function is not centered
around the x-axis. A periodic signal has a DC offset component if it is not centered about
the x-axis. In general, the DC value is the amount that must be subtracted from the signal
to center it on the x-axis. by definition:

28

Terminology
R T /2

A0 = (1/T ) ∗ −T /2 f (x)dx
With A0 being the DC offset. If A0 = 0, the function is centered and has no offset.

4.22.7 Half-wave Symmetry
To determine if a signal with period 2L has half-wave symmetry, we need to examine a
single period of the signal. If, when shifted by half the period, the signal is found to be
the negative of the original signal, then the signal has half-wave symmetry. That is, the
following property is satisfied:

f (t − L) = −f (t)

Figure 12

Half-wave symmetry implies that the second half of the wave is exactly opposite to the first
half. A function with half-wave symmetry does not have to be even or odd, as this property
requires only that the shifted signal is opposite, and this can occur for any temporal offset.
However, it does require that the DC offset is zero, as one half must exactly cancel out the
other. If the whole signal has a DC offset, this cannot occur, as when one half is added
to the other, the offsets will add, not cancel. Note that if a signal is symmetric about
the the half-period point, it is not necessarily half-wave symmetric. An example of this is
the function t3 , periodic on [-1,1), which has no DC offset and odd symmetry about t=0.
However, when shifted by 1, the signal is not opposite to the original signal.

4.22.8 Quarter-Wave Symmetry
If a signal has the following properties, it is said to quarter-wave symmetric:
• It is half-wave symmetric.

29

Signal and System Basics
• It has symmetry (odd or even) about the quarter-period point (i.e. at a distance of L/2
from an end or the centre).

Figure 13
Even Signal with Quarter-Wave
Symmetry

Figure 14
Odd Signal with Quarter-Wave
Symmetry

Any quarter-wave symmetric signal can be made even or odd by shifting it up or down the
time axis. A signal does not have to be odd or even to be quarter-wave symmetric, but in
order to find the quarter-period point, the signal will need to be shifted up or down to make
it so. Below is an example of a quarter-wave symmetric signal (red) that does not show this
property without first being shifted along the time axis (green, dashed):

Figure 15
Asymmetric Signal with Quarter-Wave Symmetry
An equivalent operation is shifting the interval the function is defined in. This may be
easier to reconcile with the formulae for Fourier series. In this case, the function would be
redefined to be periodic on (-L+Δ,L+Δ), where Δ is the shift distance.

4.22.9 Discontinuities
Discontinuities are an artifact of some signals that make them difficult to manipulate for
a variety of reasons. In a graphical sense, a periodic signal has discontinuities whenever
there is a vertical line connecting two adjacent values of the signal. In a more mathematical
sense, a periodic signal has discontinuities anywhere that the function has an undefined

30

Common Periodic Signals
(or an infinite) derivative. These are also places where the function does not have a limit,
because the values of the limit from both directions are not equal.

4.23 Common Periodic Signals
There are some common periodic signals that are given names of their own. We will list
those signals here, and discuss them.

4.23.1 Sinusoid
The quintessential periodic waveform. These can be either Sine functions, or Cosine
Functions.

4.23.2 Square Wave
The square wave is exactly what it sounds like: a series of rectangular pulses spaced
equidistant from each other, each with the same amplitude.

4.23.3 Triangle Wave
The triangle wave is also exactly what it sounds like: a series of triangles. These triangles
may touch each other, or there may be some space in between each wavelength.

4.23.4 Example: Sinusoid, Square, and Triangle Waves
Here is an image that shows some of the common periodic waveforms, a triangle wave, a
square wave, a sawtooth wave, and a sinusoid.

31

Signal and System Basics

Figure 16

4.24 Classifications
Periodic functions can be classified in a number of ways. one of the ways that they can be
classified is according to their symmetry. A function may be Odd, Even, or Neither Even
nor Odd. All periodic functions can be classified in this way.

4.24.1 Even
Functions are even if they are symmetrical about the y-axis.
f (x) = f (−x)
For instance, a cosine function is an even function.

4.24.2 Odd
A function is odd if it is inversely symmetrical about the y-axis.
f (x) = −f (−x)

32

Classifications
The Sine function is an odd function.

4.24.3 Neither Even nor Odd
Some functions are neither even nor odd. However, such functions can be written as a sum
of even and odd functions. Any function f(x) can be expressed as a sum of an odd function
and an even function:
f (x) = 1/2{f (x) + f (−x)} + 1/2{f (x) − f (−x)}
We leave it as an exercise to the reader to verify that the first component is even and that
the second component is odd. Note that the first term is zero for odd functions and that
the second term is zero for even functions.

33

5 Frequency Representation
Signals and Systems1

5.1 The Fourier Series
The Fourier Series is a specialized tool that allows for any periodic signal (subject to certain
conditions) to be decomposed into an infinite sum of everlasting sinusoids. This may not
be obvious to many people, but it is demonstrable both mathematically and graphically.
Practically, this allows the user of the Fourier Series to understand a periodic signal as the
sum of various frequency components.

5.2 Rectangular Series
The rectangular series represents a signal as a sum of sine and cosine terms. The type of
sinusoids that a periodic signal can be decomposed into depends solely on the qualities of
the periodic signal.

5.2.1 Calculations
If we have a function f(x), that is periodic with a period of 2L, we can decompose it into a
sum of sine and cosine functions as such:
f (x) = 12 a0 +

P∞ 
n=1

nπx
an cos nπx
L + bn sin L





The coefficients, a and b can be found using the following integrals:
L
f (x) cos nπx
dx
an = L1 −L
L

R



L
f (x) sin nπx
dx
bn = L1 −L
L

R



"n" is an integer variable. It can assume positive integer numbers (1, 2, 3, etc...). Each value
of n corresponds to values for A and B. The sinusoids with magnitudes A and B are called
harmonics. Using Fourier representation, a harmonic is an atomic (indivisible) component
of the signal, and is said to be orthogonal. When we set n = 1, the resulting sinusoidal
frequency value from the above equations is known as the fundamental frequency. The
fundamental frequency of a given signal is the most powerful sinusoidal component of a
signal, and is the most important to transmit faithfully. Since n takes on integer values, all

1

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

35

Frequency Representation
other frequency components of the signal are integer multiples of the fundamental frequency.
If we consider a signal in time, the period, T0 is analagous to 2L in the above definition.
The fundamental frequency is then given by:

f0 = T10
And the fundamental angular frequency is then:

ω0 = 2π
T0
Thus we can replace every

nπx
L



term with a more concise (nω0 x).

The fundamental frequency is the repetition frequency of the periodic
signal

5.2.2 Signal Properties
Various signal properties translate into specific properties of the Fourier series. If we
can identify these properties before hand, we can save ourselves from doing unnecessary
calculations.
DC Offset
If the periodic signal has a DC offset, then the Fourier Series of the signal will include a
zero frequency component, known as the DC component. If the signal does not have a DC
offset, the DC component has a magnitude of 0. Due to the linearity of the Fourier series
process, if the DC offset is removed, we can analyse the signal further (e.g. for symmetry)
and add the DC offset back at the end.
Odd and Even Signals
If the signal is even (symmetric over the reference vertical axis), it is composed of cosine
waves. If the signal is odd (anti-symmetric over the reference vertical axis), it is composed
out of sine waves. If the signal is neither even nor odd, it is composed out of both sine and
cosine waves.

36

Rectangular Series
Discontinuous Signal
If the signal is discontinuous (i.e. it has "jumps"), the magnitudes of each harmonic n will
fall off proportionally to 1/n.
Discontinuous Derivative
If the signal is continuous but the derivative of the signal is discontinuous, the magnitudes
of each harmonic n will fall off proportionally to 1/n2 .
Half-Wave Symmetry
If a signal has half-wave symmetry, there is no DC offset, and the signal is composed of
sinusoids lying on only the odd harmonics (1, 3, 5, etc...). This is important because a
signal with half-wave symmetry will require twice as much bandwidth to transmit the same
number of harmonics as a signal without:

a0 = 0

(

0,

an =

2 RL
L 0 f (x) cos(nω0 x)dx,

(

bn =

0,
2 RL
L 0 f (x) sin(nω0 x)dx,

if n is even
if n is odd

if n is even
if n is odd

Quarter-Wave Symmetry of an Even Signal
If a 2L-periodic signal has quarter-wave symmetry, then it must also be half-wave symmetric,
so there are no even harmonics. If the signal is even and has quarter-wave symmetry, we
only need to integrate the first quarter-period:

(

an =

0,
4 R L/2

L 0

if n is even
f (x) cos(nω0 x)dx, if n is odd

We also know that because the signal is half-wave symmetric, there is no DC offset:

37

Frequency Representation

a0 = 0
Because the signal is even, there are are no sine terms:

bn = 0
Quarter-Wave Symmetry of an Odd Signal
If the signal is odd, and has quarter wave symmetry, then we can say: Because the signal is
odd, there are no cosine terms:

a0 = 0
an = 0
There are no even sine terms due to half-wave symmetry, and we only need to integrate the
first quarter-period due to quarter-wave symmetry.

(

bn =

0,

if n is even

4 R L/2
f (x) sin(nω0 x)dx,
L 0

if n is odd

5.2.3 Summary
By convention, the coefficients of the cosine components are labeled "a", and the coefficients
of the sine components are labeled with a "b". A few important facts can then be mentioned:
• If the function has a DC offset, a0 will be non-zero. There is no B0 term.
• If the signal is even, all the b terms are 0 (no sine components).
• If the signal is odd, all the a terms are 0 (no cosine components).
• If the function has half-wave symmetry, then all the even coefficients (of sine and cosine
terms) are zero, and we only have to integrate half the signal.
• If the function has quarter-wave symmetry, we only need to integrate a quarter of the
signal.
• The Fourier series of a sine or cosine wave contains a single harmonic because a sine or
cosine wave cannot be decomposed into other sine or cosine waves.
• We can check a series by looking for discontinuities in the signal or derivative of the
signal. If there are discontinuities, the harmonics drop off as 1/n, if the derivative is
discontinuous, the harmonics drop off as 1/n2 .

38

Polar Series

5.3 Polar Series
The Fourier Series can also be represented in a polar form which is more compact and easier
to manipulate. If we have the coefficients of the rectangular Fourier Series, a and b we can
define a coefficient x, and a phase angle φ that can be calculated in the following manner:
x0 = a0
xn =

p

a2n + b2n

φn = tan−1



bn
an



We can then define f(x) in terms of our new Fourier representation, by using a cosine basis
function:
f (x) = x0 +

P∞

n=1 xn cos(nωx − φn )

The use of a cosine basis instead of a sine basis is an arbitrary distinction, but is important
nonetheless. If we wanted to use a sine basis instead of a cosine basis, we would have to
modify our equation for φ, above.

5.3.1 Proof of Equivalence
We can show explicitly that the polar cosine basis function is equivalent to the "Cartesian"
form with a sine and cosine term.
f (x) = x0 +

P∞

n=1 xn cos(nωx − φn )

By the double-angle formula for cosines:
f (x) = x0 +

P∞

n=1 xn [cos(nωx) cos(−φn ) − sin(nωx) sin(−φn )]

By the odd-even properties of cosines and sines:
f (x) = x0 +

P∞

n=1 xn [cos(nωx) cos(φn ) + sin(nωx) sin(φn )]

Grouping the coefficents:
f (x) = x0 +

P∞

n=1 [xn cos(φn ) cos(nωx) + xn sin(φn ) sin(nωx)]

This is equivalent to the rectangular series given that:
an = xn cos(φn )
bn = xn sin(φn )
Dividing, we get:
xn sin(φn )
bn
an = xn cos(φn ) = tan(φn )

φn = tan−1



bn
an



Squaring and adding, we get:
a2n + b2n = x2n cos2 (φn ) + sin2 (φn )




a2n + b2n = x2n

39

Frequency Representation
xn =

p

a2n + b2n

Hence, given the above definitions of xn and φn , the two are equivalent. For a sine basis
function, just use the sine double-angle formula. The rest of the process is very similar.

5.4 Exponential Series
Using Eulers Equation, and a little trickery, we can convert the standard Rectangular Fourier
Series into an exponential form. Even though complex numbers are a little more complicated
to comprehend, we use this form for a number of reasons:
1. Only need to perform one integration
2. A single exponential can be manipulated more easily than a sum of sinusoids
3. It provides a logical transition into a further discussion of the Fourier Transform.
We can construct the exponential series from the rectangular series using Euler's formulae:
ix
−ix ;
sin(x) = −i
2 e −e



cos(x) = 21 eix + e−ix



The rectangular series is given by:
f (x) = a0 +

P∞

n=1 [an cos(nωx) + bn sin(nωx)]

Substituting Euler's formulae:
f (x) = a0 +

P∞ h an inωx an −inωx ibn inωx ibn −inωx i
+ 2e
− 2 e
+ 2 e
n=1 2 e

Splitting into "positive n" and "negative n" parts gives us:
f (x) = a0 +

h
i
P∞ h an inωx ibn inωx i P−1
a−n inωx
ib−n inωx
e
−
e
+
e
+
e
n=1 2
n=−∞
2
2
2

f (x) = a0 +

P∞

1
1
inωx + P−1
inωx
n=1 2 (an − ibn )e
n=−∞ 2 (a−n + ib−n )e

We now collapse this into a single expression:
[Exponential Fourier Series]
f (x) =

P∞

inωx
n=−∞ cn e

Where we can relate cn to an and bn from the rectangular series:

cn =


1



2 (a−n + ib−n ),


a ,
0

1



2 (an − ibn ),




n<0
n=0
n

>0

This is the exponential Fourier series of f(x). Note that cn is, in general, complex. Also note
that:
• <(cn ) = <(c−n )
• =(cn ) = −=(c−n )
We can directly calculate cn for a 2L-periodic function:

40

Negative Frequency
1 L
−inπx/L dx
cn = 2L
−L f (x)e

R

This can be related to the an and bn definitions in the rectangular form using Euler's formula:
eix = cos x + i sin x.

5.5 Negative Frequency
The Exponential form of the Fourier series does something that is very interesting in
comparison to the rectangular and polar forms of the series: it allows for negative frequency
components. To this effect, the Exponential series is often known as the "Bi-Sided Fourier
Series", because the spectrum has both a positive and negative side. This, of course, prods
the question, "What is a negative Frequency?" Negative frequencies seem counter-intuitive,
and many people would be quick to dismiss them as being nonsense. However, a further study
of electrical engineering (which is outside the scope of this book) will provide many examples
of where negative frequencies play a very important part in modeling and understanding
certain systems. While it may not make much sense initially, negative frequencies need to
be taken into account when studying the Fourier Domain. Negative frequencies follow the
important rule of symmetry: For real signals, negative frequency components are always
mirror-images of the positive frequency components. Once this rule is learned, drawing
the negative side of the spectrum is a trivial matter once the positive side has been drawn.
However, when looking at a bi-sided spectrum, the effect of negative frequencies needs to be
taken into account. If the negative frequencies are mirror-images of the positive frequencies,
and if a negative frequency is analogous to a positive frequency, then the effect of adding the
negative components into a signal is the same as doubling the positive components. This is
a major reason why the exponential Fourier series coefficients are multiplied by one-half in
the calculation: because half the coefficient is at the negative frequency. Note: The concept
of negative frequency is actually unphysical. Negative frequencies occur in the spectrum
only when we are using the exponential form of the Fourier series. To represent a cosine
function, Euler's relationship tells us that there are both positive and negative exponential
required. Why? Because to represent a real function, like cosine, the imaginary components
present in exponential notation must vanish. Thus, the negative exponent in Euler's formula
makes it appear that there are negative frequencies, when in fact, there are not.

5.5.1 Example: Ceiling Fan
Another way to understand negative frequencies is to use them for mathematical completeness
in describing the physical world. Suppose we want to describe the rotation of a ceiling fan
directly above our head to a person sitting nearby. We would say "it rotates at 60 RPM in an
anticlockwise direction". However, if we want to describe its rotation to a person watching
the fan from above then we would say "it rotates at 60 RPM in a clockwise direction". If we
customarily use a negative sign for clockwise rotation, then we would use a positive sign for
anticlockwise rotation. We are describing the same process using both positive and negative
signs, depending on the reference we choose.

41

Frequency Representation

5.6 Bandwidth
Bandwidth is the name for the frequency range that a signal requires for transmission,
and is also a name for the frequency capacity of a particular transmission medium. For
example, if a given signal has a bandwidth of 10kHz, it requires a transmission medium
with a bandwidth of at least 10kHz to transmit without attenuation. Bandwidth can be
measured in either Hertz or Radians per Second. Bandwidth is only a measurement of
the positive frequency components. All real signals have negative frequency components,
but since they are only mirror images of the positive frequency components, they are not
included in bandwidth calculations.

5.6.1 Bandwidth Concerns
It's important to note that most periodic signals are composed of an infinite sum of
sinusoids, and therefore require an infinite bandwidth to be transmitted without distortion.
Unfortunately, no available communication medium (wire, fiber optic, wireless) have an
infinite bandwidth available. This means that certain harmonics will pass through the
medium, while other harmonics of the signal will be attenuated. Engineering is all about
trade-offs. The question here is "How many harmonics do I need to transmit, and how many
can I safely get rid of?" Using fewer harmonics leads to reduced bandwidth requirements,
but also results in increased signal distortion. These subjects will all be considered in more
detail in the future.

5.6.2 Pulse Width
Using our relationship between period and frequency, we can see an important fact:
f0 = T1
As the period of the signal decreases, the fundamental frequency increases. This means that
each additional harmonic will be spaced further apart, and transmitting the same number
of harmonics will now require more bandwidth! In general, there is a rule that must be
followed when considering periodic signals: Shorter periods in the time domain require more
bandwidth in the frequency domain. Signals that use less bandwidth in the frequency domain
will require longer periods in the time domain.

5.7 Examples
5.7.1 Example: x3
Let's consider a repeating pattern based on a cubic polynomial:
f (x) = x3 ,

−π ≤ x < π

and f(x) is 2π periodic:

42

Examples

Figure 18

By inspection, we can determine some characteristics of the Fourier Series:
• The function is odd, so the cosine coefficients (an ) will all be zero.
• The function has no DC offset, so there will be no constant term (a0 ).
• There are discontinuities, so we expect a 1/n drop-off.
We therefore just have to compute the bn terms. These can be found by the following
formula:
bn = π1

Rπ

f (x) sin (nx) dx

−π

Substituting in the desired function gives
bn = π1

Rπ

x3 sin (nx) dx

−π

Integrating by parts,
bn = π1

iπ
Rπ
−x3 cos(nx)
dx
+
3x2 cos(nx)
n
n
−π −π

h

!

Bring out factors:
1
bn = nπ

π

−x3 cos (nx) −π + 3



Rπ

!

x2 cos (nx) dx

−π

Substitute limits into the square brackets and integrate by parts again:

43

Frequency Representation

1
bn = nπ

−

π 3 cos (nπ) + π 3 cos (−nπ)



+3

iπ
Rπ
x2 sin(nx)
− 2x sin(nx)
dx
n
n
−π −π

h

!!

Recall that cos(x) is an even function, so cos(-nπ) = cos(nπ). Also bring out the factor of
1/n from the integral:
1
bn = nπ
− π 3 cos (nπ) + π 3 cos (nπ) + n3



π

 2

x sin (nx) −π − 2

Rπ

!!

x sin (nx) dx

−π

Simplifying the left part, and substituting in limits in the square brackets,
1
bn = nπ

−2π 3 cos (nπ) + n3

π 2 sin (nπ) − π sin (−nπ)



−2

Rπ

!!

x sin (nx) dx

−π

Recall that sin(nπ) is always equal to zero for integer n:
1
bn = nπ

−2π 3 cos (nπ) + n3

0−2

!!

Rπ

x sin (nx) dx

−π

Bringing out factors and integrating by parts:
"
1
bn = nπ

−2π 3 cos (nπ) − n6

−

h

#!

iπ
Rπ
+ cos(nx)
x cos(nx)
dx
n
n
−π −π

"

Rπ
−[x cos (nx)]π−π + cos (nx) dx
−π

1
−2π 3 cos (nπ) − n62
bn = nπ

#!

Solving the now-simple integral and substituting in limits to the square brackets,


h

1
bn = nπ
−2π 3 cos (nπ) − n62 − (π cos (nπ) + π cos (−nπ)) + [sin (nx)]π−π

i

Since the area under one cycle of a sine wave is zero, we can eliminate the integral. We use
the fact that cos(x) is even again to simplify:




1
bn = nπ
−2π 3 cos (nπ) − n62 [−2π cos (nπ) + 0]

Simplifying:




1
bn = nπ
−2π 3 cos (nπ) + 12π
cos (nπ)
n2
2

bn = −2π cos(nπ)
+ 12 cos(nπ)
n
n3
bn = cos (nπ)



−2π 2 n2
+ n123
n3

bn = −2 cos(nπ)
π 2 n2 − 6
n3





Now, use the fact that cos(nπ)=(-1)n :
n

bn = −2(−1)
n3

π 2 n2 − 6



This is our final bn . We see that we have a approximate 1/n relationship (the constant
"6" becomes insignificant as n grows), as we expected. Now, we can find the Fourier
approximation according to
f (x) = 12 a0 +

44

∞
P
n=1

[an cos (nx) + bn sin (nx)]

Examples
Since all a terms are zero,
f (x) =

∞
P

bn sin (nx)

n=1

So, the Fourier Series approximation of f(x) = x3 is:
f (x) =

∞ h
P
−2(−1)n
n=1

n3

i

π 2 n2 − 6 sin (nx)


The graph below shows the approximation for the first 7 terms (red) and the first 15 terms
(blue). The original function is shown in black.

Figure 19

5.7.2 Example: Square Wave
We have the following square wave signal, as a function of voltage, traveling through a
communication medium:

45

Frequency Representation

Figure 20
We will set the values as follows: A = 4 volts, T = 1 second. Also, it is given that the
width of a single pulse is T/2. Find the rectangular Fourier series of this signal. First and
foremost, we can see clearly that this signal does have a DC value: the signal exists entirely
above the horizontal axis. DC value means that we will have to calculate our a0 term. Next,
we can see that if we remove the DC component (shift the signal downward till it is centered
around the horizontal axis), that our signal is an odd signal. This means that we will have bn
terms, but no an terms. We can also see that this function has discontinuities and half-wave
symmetry. Let's recap:
1. DC value (must calculate a0 )
2. Odd Function (an = 0 for n > 0)
3. Discontinuties (terms fall off as 1/n)
4. Half-wave Symmetry (no even harmonics)
Now, we can calculate these values as follows:
a0 = T1

RT

a0 = T1

R T /2

0 f (t)dt

0

4dt

T /2

a0 = T1 [4t]0

= T4×T
×2 = 2

This could also have been worked out intuitively, as the signal has a 50% duty-cycle, meaning
that the average value is half of the maximum. Due to the oddness of the function, there
are no cosine terms:
an = 0

46

for all n > 0.

Examples
Due to the half-wave symmetry, there are only odd sine terms, which are given by:
R



R T /2

4 sin (2nπt) dt

bn = T1/2 0T f (t) sin
bn = T2

0

2nπt
T



dt

i1/2

h

4
bn = −2 2nπ
cos (2nπt)

h

4
bn = −2 2nπ
cos



2nπ
2



0

i

4
− 2nπ
cos (2nπ × 0)

4
bn = − nπ
[cos (nπ) − 1]

Given that cos(nπ)=(-1)n :
n

−1)
bn = − 4((−1)
nπ

For any even n, this equals zero, in accordance with our predictions based on half-wave
symmetry. It also decays as 1/n, as we expect, due to the presence of discontinuities. Finally,
we can put our Fourier series together as follows:
f (t) = a0 +

P∞

f (t) = 2 − π4



n=1 bn sin

P∞

n=1

πnt



L
2

(−1)n −1
sin(2πnt)
n

This is the same as
f (t) = 2 + π8

P∞

1
n=1,3,5,... n sin(2πnt)

We see that the Fourier series closely matches the original function:

Figure 21

47

Frequency Representation

5.8 Further Reading
Wikipedia2 has related information at Fourier series3
Wikipedia has an article on the Fourier Series, although the article is very mathematically
rigorous.

Signals and Systems4

5.9 Periodic Inputs
5.9.1 System Response

5.10 Plotting Results
From the polar form of the Fourier series, we can see that essentially, there are 2 quantities
that that Fourier series provides: Magnitude, and Phase shift. If we simplify the entire series
into the polar form, we can see that instead of being an infinite sum of different sinusoids,
we get simply an infinite sum of cosine waves, with varying magnitude and phase parameters.
This makes the entire series easier to work with, and also allows us to begin working with
different graphical methods of analysis.

5.10.1 Magnitude Plots
It is important to remember at this point that the Fourier series turns a continuous, periodic
time signal into a discrete set of frequency components. In essence, any plot of Fourier
components will be a stem plot, and will not be continuous. The user should never make the
mistake of attempting to interpolate the components into a smooth graph. The magnitude
graphs of a Fourier series representation plots the magnitude of the coefficient (either Xn in
polar, or Cn in exponential form) against the frequency, in radians per second. The X-axis
will have the independent variable, in this case the frequency. The Y-axis will hold the
magnitude of each component. The magnitude can be a measure of either current or voltage,
depending on how the original signal was represented. Keep in mind, however, that most
signals, and their resulting magnitude plots, are discussed in terms of voltage (not current).

5.10.2 Phase Plots
Similar to the magnitude plots, the phase plots of the Fourier representation will graph the
phase angle of each component against the frequency. Both the frequency (X-axis), and the
phase angle (Y-axis) will be plotted in units of radians per seconds. Occasionally, Hertz
2
3
4

48

http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier_series
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

Power
may be used for one (or even both), but this is not the normal case. Like the magnitude
plot, the phase plot of a Fourier series will be discrete, and should be drawn as individual
points, not as smooth lines.

5.11 Power
Frequently, it is important to talk about the power in a given periodic wave. It is also
important to talk about how much power is being transmitted in each different harmonic.
For instance, if a certain channel has a limited bandwidth, and is filtering out some of the
harmonics of the signal, then it is important to know how much power is being removed
from the signal by the channel.

5.11.1 Normalization
Let us now take a look at our equation for power:
P = iv
Ohm's Law:
v = ir If we use Ohm's Law to solve for v and i respectively, and then plug those values into
our equation, we will get the following result:
2

P = i2 R = vR

If we normalize the equation, and set R = 1, then both equations become much easier.
In any case where the words "normalized power" are used, it denotes the fact that we are
using a normalized resistance (R = 1). To "de-normalize" the power, and find the power
loss across a load with a non-normalized resistance, we can simply divide by the resistance
(when in terms of voltage), and multiply by the resistance (when in terms of current).

5.11.2 Power Plots
Because of the above result, we can assume that all loads are normalized, and we can find the
power in a signal simply by squaring the signal itself. In terms of Fourier Series harmonics,
we square the magnitude of each harmonic separately to produce the power spectrum.
The power spectrum shows us how much power is in each harmonic.

5.12 Parsevals Theorem
If the Fourier Representation and the Time-Domain Representation are simply two different
ways to consider the same set of information, then it would make sense that the two are
equal in many ways. The power and energy in a signal when expressed in the time domain
should be equal to the power and energy of that same signal when expressed in the frequency
domain. Parseval's Theorem relates the two. Parsevals theorem states that the power

49

Frequency Representation
calculated in the time domain is the same as the power calculated in the frequency domain.
There are two ways to look at Parseval's Theorem, using the one-sided (polar) form of the
Fourier Series, and using the two-sided (exponential) form:
P = 0T f 2 (t)dt = X02 +
R

Xn2
n=1 2

P∞

and
P=

P∞

−∞ Cn C−n =

P∞

−∞ |Cn |

2

By changing the upper-bound of the summation in the frequency domain, we can limit the
power calculation to a limited number of harmonics. For instance, if the channel bandwidth
limited a particular signal to only the first 5 harmonics, then the upper-bound could be set
to 5, and the result could be calculated.

5.13 Energy Spectrum
With Parseval's theorem, we can calculate the amount of energy being used by a signal in
different parts of the spectrum. This is useful in many applications, such as filtering, that
we will discuss later. We know from Parseval's theorem that to obtain the energy of the
harmonics of the signal that we need to square the frequency representation in order to view
the energy. We can define the energy spectral density of the signal as the square of the
Fourier transform of the signal:
EF (θ) = F 2 (θ)
The magnitude of the graph at different frequencies represents the amount energy located
within those frequency components.

5.14 Power Spectral Density
Akin to energy in a signal is the amount of power in a signal. To find the power spectrum,
or power spectral density (PSD) of a signal, take the Fourier Transform of the Auto
Correlation of the signal(which is in frequency domain).

5.15 Signal to Noise Ratio
In the presence of noise, it is frequently important to know what is the ratio between the
signal (which you want), and the noise (which you don't want). The ratio between the
noise and the signal is called the Signal to Noise Ratio, and is abbreviated with the
letters SNR. There are actually 2 ways to represent SNR, one as a straight-ratio, and one
in decibels. The two terms are functionally equivalent, although since they are different
quantities, they cannot be used in the same equations. It is worth emphasizing that decibels
cannot be used in calculations the same way that ratios are used.
SN R = Signal
N oise

50

Aperiodic Signals
Here, the SNR can be in terms of either power or voltage, so it must be specified which
quantity is being compared. Now, when we convert SNR into decibels:
SN Rdb = 10log10



Signal
N oise



For instance, an SNR of 3db means that the signal is twice as powerful as the noise signal.
A higher SNR (in either representation) is always preferable.

Signals and Systems5
Wikipedia6 has related information at Fourier transform7

5.16 Aperiodic Signals
The opposite of a periodic signal is an aperiodic signal. An aperiodic function never
repeats, although technically an aperiodic function can be considered like a periodic function
with an infinite period.

5.17 Background
If we consider aperiodic signals, it turns out that we can generalize the Fourier Series sum
into an integral named the Fourier Transform. The Fourier Transform is used similarly
to the Fourier Series, in that it converts a time-domain function into a frequency domain
representation. However, there are a number of differences:
1. Fourier Transform can work on Aperiodic Signals.
2. Fourier Transform is an infinite sum of infinitesimal sinusoids.
3. Fourier Transform has an inverse transform, that allows for conversion from the
frequency domain back to the time domain.

5.18 Fourier Transform
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB8 command:
fft
The Fourier Transform is the following integral:
∞
F(f (t)) = F (jω) = −∞
f (t)e−jωt dt

R

5
6
7
8

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier_transform
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming

51

Frequency Representation

5.19 Inverse Fourier Transform
And the inverse transform is given by a similar integral:
1 ∞
jωt dω
F −1 {F (jω)} = f (t) = 2π
−∞ F (jω)e

R

Using these formulas, time-domain signals can be converted to and from the frequency
domain, as needed.

5.19.1 Partial Fraction Expansion
One of the most important tools when attempting to find the inverse fourier transform is
the Theory of Partial Fractions. The theory of partial fractions allows a complicated
fractional value to be decomposed into a sum of small, simple fractions. This technique is
highly important when dealing with other transforms as well, such as the Laplace transform
and the Z-Transform.
A reader requests expansion of this page to include more material.
You can help by adding new material9 ( learn how10 ) or ask for assistance in
the reading room11 .

5.20 Duality
The Fourier Transform has a number of special properties, but perhaps the most important
is the property of duality. We will use a "double-arrow" signal to denote duality. If we have
an even signal f, and it's fourier transform F, we can show duality as such:
f (t) ⇔ F (jω)
This means that the following rules hold true:
F{f (t)} = F (jω) AND F{F (t)} = f (jω)
Notice how in the second part we are taking the transform of the transformed equation,
except that we are starting in the time domain. We then convert to the original time-domain
representation, except using the frequency variable. There are a number of results of the
Duality Theorem.

5.20.1 Convolution Theorem
The Convolution Theorem is an important result of the duality property. The convolution
theorem states the following:

9
10
11

52

http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Signals_and_Systems/
Print_version&amp;action=edit
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Using_Wikibooks
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Wikibooks:PROJECTS

Power and Energy
Convolution Theorem
Convolution in the time domain is multiplication in the frequency domain. Multiplication
in the time domain is convolution in the frequency domain.
Or, another way to write it (using our new notation) is such:
A×B ⇔ A∗B

5.20.2 Signal Width
Another principle that must be kept in mind is that signal-widths in the time domain,
and bandwidth in the frequency domain are related. This can be summed up in a single
statement:
Thin signals in the time domain occupy a wide bandwidth. Wide signals in the time domain
occupy a thin bandwidth.
This conclusion is important because in modern communication systems, the goal is to
have thinner (and therefore more frequent) pulses for increased data rates, however the
consequence is that a large amount of bandwidth is required to transmit all these fast, little
pulses.

5.21 Power and Energy
5.21.1 Energy Spectral Density
Unlike the Fourier Series, the Fourier Transform does not provide us with a number of
discrete harmonics that we can add and subtract in a discrete manner. If our channel
bandwidth is limited, in the Fourier Series representation, we can simply remove some
harmonics from our calculations. However, in a continuous spectrum, we do not have
individual harmonics to manipulate, but we must instead examine the entire continuous
signal. The Energy Spectral Density (ESD) of a given signal is the square of its Fourier
transform. By definition, the ESD of a function f(t) is given by F2 (jω). The power over a
given range (a limited bandwidth) is the integration under the ESD graph, between the
cut-off points. The ESD is often written using the variable Ef (jω).
Ef (jω) = F 2 (jω)

5.21.2 Power Spectral Density
The Power Spectral Density (PSD) is similar to the ESD. It shows the distribution of
power in the spectrum of a particular signal.
∞
Pf (jω) = −∞
F (jω)dω

R

Power spectral density and the autocorrelation form a Fourier Transform duality pair. This
means that:

53

Frequency Representation
Pf (jω) = F[Rf f (t)]
If we know the autocorrelation of the signal, we can find the PSD by taking the Fourier
transform. Similarly, if we know the PSD, we can take the inverse Fourier transform to find
the autocorrelation signal.

Signals and Systems12

5.22 Frequency Response
Systems respond differently to inputs of different frequencies. Some systems may amplify
components of certain frequencies, and attenuate components of other frequencies. The way
that the system output is related to the system input for different frequencies is called the
frequency response of the system. The frequency response is the relationship between the
system input and output in the Fourier Domain.

Figure 22
In this system, X(jω) is the system input, Y(jω) is the system output, and H(jω) is the
frequency response. We can define the relationship between these functions as:
Y (jω) = H(jω)X(jω)
Y (jω)
X(jω) = H(jω)

5.23 The Frequency Response Functions
Since the frequency response is a complex function, we can convert it to polar notation in
the complex plane. This will give us a magnitude and an angle. We call the angle the phase.

5.23.1 Amplitude Response
For each frequency, the magnitude represents the system's tendency to amplify or attenuate
the input signal.

A (ω) = |H (jω)|

12

54

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

Examples

5.23.2 Phase Response
The phase represents the system's tendency to modify the phase of the input sinusoids.

φ (ω) = ∠H (jω).
The phase response, or its derivative the group delay, tells us how the system delays the
input signal as a function of frequency.

5.24 Examples
5.24.1 Example: Electric Circuit
Consider the following general circuit with phasor input and output voltages:

Figure 23

Where
Vo (jω) = Vom cos (ωt + θo ) = Vom ∠θo
Vi (jω) = Vim cos (ωt + θi ) = Vim ∠θi
As before, we can define the system function, H(jω) of this circuit as:
(jω)
H (jω) = VVoi (jω)
o (jω)|
Vom
A (ω) = |H (jω)| = |V
|Vi (jω)| = Vim

φ (ω) = ∠H (jω) = ∠



Vo (jω)
Vi (jω)



= ∠Vo (jω) − ∠Vi (jω) = θo − θi

Rearranging gives us the following transformations:
Vom = A (ω) Vim

55

Frequency Representation
θo = θi + φ (ω)

5.24.2 Example: Low-Pass Filter
We will illustrate this method using a simple low-pass filter with general values as an example.
This kind of circuit allows low frequencies to pass, but blocks higher ones. Find the frequency
response function, and hence the amplitude and phase response functions, of the following
RC circuit (it is already in phasor form):

Figure 24

Firstly, we use the voltage divider rule to get the output phasor in terms on the input phasor:

1

Vo (jω) = Vi (jω) · R+jωC1

jωC

Now we can easily determine the frequency response:

1

(jω)
H (jω) = VVoi (jω)
= R+jωC1

jωC

This simiplifies down to:

1
H (jω) = 1+jωRC

From here we can find the amplitude and phase responses:

56

Examples
A (ω) = |H (jω)| = √

1
1+(ωCR)2

φ (ω) = ∠H (jω) = tan−1

 
0
1

− tan−1



ωRC
1



= − tan−1 (ωRC)

The frequency response is pictured by the plots of the amplitude and phase responses:

Figure 25

57

Frequency Representation

Figure 26

It is often easier to interpret the graphs when they are plotted on suitable logarithmic scales:

Figure 27

58

Filters

Figure 28

This shows that the circuit is indeed a filter that removes higher frequencies. Such a filter
is called a lowpass filter. The amplitude and phase responses of an arbitrary circuit can
be plotted using an instrument called a spectrum analyser or gain and phase test set.
See Practical Electronics13 for more details on using these instruments.

5.25 Filters
An important concept to take away from these examples is that by desiging a proper system
called a filter, we can selectively attenuate or amplify certain frequency ranges. This means
that we can minimize certain unwanted frequency components (such as noise or competing
data signals), and maximize our own data signal We can define a "received signal" r as a
combination of a data signal d and unwanted components v:
r(t) = d(t) + v(t)
We can take the energy spectral density of r to determine the frequency ranges of our data
signal d. We can design a filter that will attempt to amplify these frequency ranges, and
attenuate the frequency ranges of v. We will discuss this problem and filters in general in
the next few chapters. More advanced discussions of this topic will be in the book on Signal
Processing14 .

13
14

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Practical_Electronics
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing

59

6 Complex Frequency Representation
6.1 The Laplace Transform
Whilst the Fourier Series1 and the Fourier Transform2 are well suited for analysing the
frequency content of a signal, be it periodic or aperiodic, the Laplace transform is the tool
of choice for analysing and developing circuits such as filters. The Fourier Transform can be
considered as an extension of the Fourier Series for aperiodic signals. The Laplace Transform
can be considered as an extension of the Fourier Transform to the complex plane.

6.1.1 Unilateral Laplace Transform
The Laplace Transform3 of a function f(t), defined for all real numbers t ≥ 0, is the function
F(s), defined by:
F (s) = L {f (t)} = 0∞ e−st f (t) dt.
R

The parameter s is the complex number:
s = σ + jω, with a real part σ and an imaginary part ω.

6.1.2 Bilateral Laplace Transform
The Bilateral Laplace Transform is defined as follows:
∞ −st
e f (t) dt.
F (s) = L {f (t)} = −∞

R

Comparing this definition to the one of the Fourier Transform4 , one sees that the latter is a
special case of the Laplace Transform for s = jω. In the field of electrical engineering, the
Bilateral Laplace Transform is simply referred as the Laplace Transform.

6.1.3 Inverse Laplace Transform
The Inverse Laplace Transform allows to find the original time function on which a Laplace
Transform has been made.:
γ+iT st
1
f (t) = L−1 {F (s)} = 2πi
limT →∞ γ−iT
e F (s) ds,

R

1
2
3
4

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Fourier_Series
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Aperiodic_Signals#Fourier_Transform
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace_transform
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Aperiodic_Signals#Fourier_Transform

61

Complex Frequency Representation

6.2 Differential Equations
6.2.1 Integral and Derivative
The properties of the Laplace transform5 show that:
• the transform of a derivative corresponds to a multiplcation with s
• the transform of an integral corresponds to a division with s
This is summarized in the following table:
Time Domain
x(t)
ẋ(t)
R
x(t)dt

Laplace Domain
X(s) = L {x(t)}
s · X(s)
1
s · X(s)

With this, a set of differential equations is transformed into a set of linear equations which
can be solved with the usual techniques of linear algebra.

6.2.2 Lumped Element Circuits
Lumped elements circuits typically show this kind of integral or differential relations between
current and voltage:

1
UC = sC
· IC

UL = sL · IL
This is why the analysis of a lumped elements circuit is usually done with the help of the
Laplace transform.

6.3 Example
6.3.1 Sallen-Key Lowpass Filter

5

62

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Table_of_Laplace_Transforms#Laplace_
Transform_Properties

Example
The Sallen-Key6 circuit is widely used for the implementation of analog second order
sections.

Figure 30

Sallen–Key unity-gain lowpass filter

The image on the side shows the circuit for an all-pole second order function. Writing v1
the potential between both resistances and v2 the input of the op-amp follower circuit, gives
the following relations:


R1 IR1 = Vin − V1






R2 IR2 = V1 − V2






IC2 = sC2 V2

IC1 = sC1 (V1 − Vout )




IR1 = IR2 + IC1





IR2 = IC2





V2 = Vout

Rewriting the current node relations gives:
(

R1 R2 IR1 = R1 R2 IR2 + R1 R2 IC1
R2 IR2 = R2 IC2

(

R2 (Vin − V1 ) = R1 (V1 − Vout ) + R1 R2 sC1 (V1 − Vout )
V1 − Vout = R2 sC2 Vout

(

R2 Vin = (R1 + R2 + R1 R2 sC1 )V1 − (R1 + R1 R2 sC1 )Vout
V1 = (1 + sR2 C2 )Vout
h

i

R2 Vin = (1 + sR2 C2 )(R1 + R2 + R1 R2 sC1 ) − R1 − R1 R2 sC1 Vout

6

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sallen_Key_filter

63

Complex Frequency Representation
h

i

Vin = (1 + sR2 C2 )(R1 /R2 + 1 + sR1 C1 − R1 /R2 − sR1 C1 Vout
Vin
2
Vout = R1 /R2 + 1 + sR1 C1 + sR1 C2 + sR2 C2 + s R1 R2 C1 C2 − R1 /R2 − sR1 C1

and finally:
Vout
1
Vin = 1+s(R1 +R2 )C2 +s2 R1 R2 C1 C2

Thus, the transfer function is:
1
R1 R2 C1 C2
R1 +R2 1
s + R R C s+ R R 1C C
1 2
1
1 2 1 2

H(s) = 2

64

7 Random Signals
Signals and Systems1

7.1 Probability
This book requires that you first read Probability2 .
This section of the Signals and Systems3 book will be talking about probability, random
signals, and noise. This book will not, however, attempt to teach the basics of probability,
because there are dozens of resources (both on the internet at large, and on Wikipedia
mathematics bookshelf) for probability and statistics. This book will assume a basic
knowledge of probability, and will work to explain random phenomena in the context of an
Electrical Engineering book on signals.

7.2 Random Variable
A random variable is a quantity whose value is not fixed but depends somehow on chance.
Typically the value of a random variable may consist of a fixed part and a random component
due to uncertainty or disturbance. Other types of random variables takes their values as a
result of the outcome of a random experiment. Random variables are usually denoted with
a capital letter. For instance, a generic random variable that we will use often is X. The
capital letter represents the random variable itself and the corresponding lower-case letter
(in this case "x") will be used to denote the observed value of X. x is one particular value of
the process X.

7.3 Mean
The mean or more precise the expected value of a random variable is the central value of the
random value, or the average of the observed values in the long run. We denote the mean of
a signal x as μx . We will discuss the precise definition of the mean in the next chapter.

1
2
3

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Probability
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

65

Random Signals

7.4 Standard Deviation
The standard deviation of a signal x, denoted by the symbol σx serves as a measure of
how much deviation from the mean the signal demonstrates. For instance, if the standard
deviation is small, most values of x are close to the mean. If the standard deviation is large,
the values are more spread out. The standard deviation is an easy concept to understand, but
in practice it's not a quantity that is easy to compute directly, nor is it useful in calculations.
However, the standard deviation is related to a more useful quantity, the variance.

7.5 Variance
The variance is the square of the standard deviation and is more of theoretical importance.
We denote the variance of a signal x as σx 2 . We will discuss the variance and how it is
calculated in the next chapter.

7.6 Probability Function
The probability function P is the probability that a certain event will occur. It is calculated
based on the probability density function and cumulative distribution function,
described below. We can use the P operator in a variety of ways:
P [A coin is heads] = 21
P [A dice shows a 3] = 16

7.7 Probability Density Function
The Probability Density Function (PDF) of a random variable is a description of the
distribution of the values of the random variable. By integrating this function over a
particular range, we can find the probability that the random variable takes on a value
in that interval. The integral of this function over all possible values is 1. We denote the
density function of a signal x as fx . The probability of an event xi will occur is given as:
P [xi ] = fx (xi )

7.8 Cumulative Distribution Function
The Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of a random variable describes the probability
of observing a value at or below a certain threshold. A CDF function will be nondecreasing
with the properties that the value of the CDF at negative infinity is zero, and the value of
the CDF at positive infinity is 1. We denote the CDF of a function with a capital F. The
CDF of a signal x will have the subscript Fx . We can say that the probability of an event
occurring less then or equal to xi is defined in terms of the CDF as:

66

Expected Value Operator
P [x ≤ xi ] = Fx (xi )
Likewise, we can define the probability that an event occurs that is greater then xi as:
P [x > xi ] = 1 − Fx (xi )
Or, the probability that an event occurs that is greater then or equal to xi :
P [x ≥ xi ] = 1 − Fx (xi ) + fx (xi )

7.8.1 Relation with PDF
The CDF and PDF are related to one another by a simple integral relation:
x
fx (τ )dτ
Fx (x) = −∞

R

d
fx (x) = dx
Fx (x)

7.8.2 Terminology
Several book sources refer to the CDF as the "Probability Distribution Function", with
the acronym PDF. To avoid the ambiguity of having both the distribution function and
the density function with the same acronym (PDF), some books will refer to the density
function as "pdf" (lower case) and the distribution function as "PDF" upper case. To avoid
this ambiguity, this book will refer to the distribution function as the CDF, and the density
function as the PDF.

Signals and Systems4

7.9 Expected Value Operator
The Expected value operator is a linear operator that provides a mathematical way to
determine a number of different parameters of a random distribution. The downside of
course is that the expected value operator is in the form of an integral, which can be difficult
to calculate. The expected value operator will be denoted by the symbol:
E[·]
For a random variable X with probability density fx , the expected value is defined as:
∞
E[X] = −∞
xfX (x)dx.

R

provided the integral exists. The Expectation of a signal is the result of applying the
expected value operator to that signal. The expectation is another word for the mean of a
signal:
µx = E[X]

4

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

67

Random Signals

7.10 Moments
The expected value of the N-th power of X is called the N-th moment of X or of its
distribution:
∞
E[X N ] = −∞
xN fX (x)dx.

R

Some moments have special names, and each one describes a certain aspect of the distribution.

7.11 Central Moments
Once we know the expected value of a distribution, we know its location. We may consider
all other moments relative to this location and calculate the Nth moment of the random
variable X - E[X]; the result is called the Nth central moment of the distribution. Each
central moment has a different meaning, and describes a different facet of the random
distribution. The N-th central moment of X is:
∞
E[(X − E[X])N ] = −∞
(x − E[X])N fX (x)dx.

R

For sake of simplicity in the notation, the first moment, the expected value is named:
E[X] = µX ,
The formula for the N-th central moment of X becomes then:
∞
E[(X − µX )N ] = −∞
(x − µX )N fX (x)dx.

R

It is obvious that the first central moment is zero:
E[(X − µX )] = 0
The second central moment is the variance,
E[(X − µX )2 ] = σ 2

7.11.1 Variance
The variance, the second central moment, is denoted using the symbol σx 2 , and is defined as:
σx2 = var(X) = E[X − E[X]]2 = E[X 2 ] − E[X]2

7.11.2 Standard Deviation
The standard deviation of a random distribution is the square root of the variance, and is
given as such:
σx =

68

p

σx2

Moment Generating Functions

7.12 Moment Generating Functions
7.13 Time-Average Operator
The time-average operator provides a mathematical way to determine the average value of a
function over a given time range. The time average operator can provide the mean value
of a given signal, but most importantly it can be used to find the average value of a small
sample of a given signal. The operator also allows us a useful shorthand way for taking the
average, which is used in many equations. The time average operator is denoted by angle
brackets (< and >) and is defined as such:
hf (t)i = T1

RT

0 f (t)dt

Signals and Systems5
There are a number of different random distributions in existence, many of which have been
studied quite extensively, and many of which map very well to natural phenomena. This
book will attempt to cover some of the most basic and most common distributions. This
chapter will also introduce the idea of a distribution transformation, which can be used to
turn a simple distribution into a more exotic distribution.

7.14 Uniform Distribution
One of the most simple distributions is a Uniform Distribution. Uniform Distributions are
also very easy to model on a computer, and then they can be converted to other distribution
types by a series of transforms. A uniform distribution has a PDF that is a rectangle. This
rectangle is centered about the mean, <μx , has a width of A, and a height of 1/A. This
definition ensures that the total area under the PDF is 1.

7.15 Gaussian Distribution
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB6 command:
randn
The Gaussian (or normal) distribution is simultaneously one of the most common distributions, and also one of the most difficult distributions to work with. The problem with the
Gaussian distribution is that it's pdf equation is non-integratable, and therefore there is no
way to find a general equation for the cdf (although some approximations are available),
and there is little or no way to directly calculate certain probabilities. However, there are
ways to approximate these probabilities from the Gaussian pdf, and many of the common
results have been tabulated in table-format. The function that finds the area under a part

5
6

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming

69

Random Signals
of the Gaussian curve (and therefore the probability of an event under that portion of the
curve) is known as the Q function, and the results are tabulated in a Q table.

7.15.1 PDF and CDF
The PDF of a Gaussian random variable is defined as such:
(x−µ)2

f (x) = √ 1 2 e− 2σ2
2πσ

The CDF of the Gaussian function is the integral of this, which any mathematician will tell
you is impossible to express in terms of regular functions.

7.15.2 The Functions Φ and Q
The normal distribution with parameters μ = 0 and σ = 1, the so-called standard normal
distribution, plays an important role, because all other normal distributions may be derived
from it. The CDF of the standard normal distribution is often indicated by Φ:
t2

−2
1 x
dt.
Φ(x) = 2π
−∞ e

R

It gives the probability for a standard normal distributed random variable to attain values
less than x. The Q function is the area under the right tail of the Gaussian curve and hence
nothing more than 1 - Φ. The Q function is hence defined as:
t2

1 ∞ −2
dt
Q(x) = 1 − Φ(x) = 2π
x e

R

Mathematical texts might prefer to use the erf(x) and erfc(x) functions, which are similar.
However this book (and engineering texts in general) will utilize the Q and Phi functions.

7.16 Poisson Distribution
The Poisson Distribution is different from the Gaussian and uniform distributions in that
the Poisson Distribution only describes discrete data sets. For instance, if we wanted to
model the number of telephone calls that are traveling through a given switch at one time,
we cannot possibly count fractions of a phone call; phone calls come only in integer numbers.
Also, you can't have a negative number of phone calls. It turns out that such situations can
be easily modeled by a Poisson Distribution. Some general examples of Poisson Distribution
random events are:
1. The telephone calls arriving at a switch
2. The internet data packets traveling through a given network
3. The number of cars traveling through a given intersection

70

Transformations

7.17 Transformations
If we have a random variable that follows a particular distribution, we would frequently like
to transform that random process to use a different distribution. For instance, if we write a
computer program that generates a uniform distribution of random numbers, and we would
like to write one that generates a Gaussian distribution instead, we can feed the uniform
numbers into a transform, and the output will be random numbers following a Gaussian
distribution. Conversely, if we have a random variable in a strange, exotic distribution, and
we would like to examine it using some of the easy, tabulated Gaussian distribution tools,
we can transform it.

7.18 Further Reading
• Statistics/Distributions7
• Probability/Important Distributions8
• Engineering Analysis/Distributions9

Signals and Systems10

7.19 Frequency Analysis
Noise, like any other signal, can be analyzed using the Fourier Transform and frequencydomain techniques. Some of the basic techniques used on noise (some of which are particular
to random signals) are discussed in this section. Gaussian white noise, one of the most
common types of noise used in analysis, has a "flat spectrum". That is, the amplitude of the
noise is the same at all frequencies.

7.20 Stationary vs Ergodic Functions
7.21 Power Spectral Density (PSD) of Gaussian White Noise
White noise has a level magnitude spectrum, and if we square it, it will also have a level
Power Spectral Density11 (PSD) function. The value of this power magnitude is known by
the variable N0 . We will use this quantity later.

7
8
9
10
11

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Statistics/Distributions
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Probability/Important_Distributions
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering_Analysis/Distributions
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_spectrum

71

Random Signals

7.22 Wiener Khintchine Einstein Theorem
Using the duality property of the Fourier Transform, the Wiener-Khintchine-Einstein Theorem gives us an easy way to find the PSD for a given signal. if we have a signal f(t), with
autocorrelation Rff , then we can find the PSD, Sxx by the following function:
Sxx = F(Rf f )
Where the previous method for obtaining the PSD was to take the Fourier transform of the
signal f(t), and then squaring it.

7.23 Bandwidth
The bandwidth of a random function.

7.23.1 Noise-Equivalent Bandwidth
7.23.2 Band limited Systems
7.23.3 Narrow band Systems

7.24 Windowing
Many random signals are infinite signals, in that they don't have a beginning or an end.
To this effect, the only way to really analyze the random signal is take a small chunk of
the random signal, called a sample. Let us say that we have a long random signal, and
we only want to analyze a sample. So we take the part that we want, and destroy the
part that we don't want. Effectively, what we have done is to multiply the signal with a
rectangular pulse. Therefore, the frequency spectrum of our sampled signal will contain
frequency components of the noise and the rectangular pulse. It turns out that multiplying
a signal by a rectangular pulse is rarely the best way to sample a random signal. It also
turns out that there are a number of other windows that can be used instead, to get a
good sample of noise, while at the same time introducing very few extraneous frequency
components. Remember duality? multiplication in the time domain (multiplying by your
windowing function) becomes convolution in the frequency domain. Effectively, we've taken a
very simple problem (getting a sample of information), and created a very difficult problem,
the deconvolution of the resultant frequency spectrum. There are a number of different
windows that we can use.

7.24.1 Rectangular Window
7.24.2 Triangular Window
7.24.3 Hamming Window

72

8 Introduction to Filters
Signals and Systems1

8.1 Frequency Response
Systems respond differently to inputs of different frequencies. Some systems may amplify
components of certain frequencies, and attenuate components of other frequencies. The way
that the system output is related to the system input for different frequencies is called the
frequency response of the system. The frequency response is the relationship between the
system input and output in the Fourier Domain.

Figure 31
In this system, X(jω) is the system input, Y(jω) is the system output, and H(jω) is the
frequency response. We can define the relationship between these functions as:
Y (jω) = H(jω)X(jω)
Y (jω)
X(jω) = H(jω)

8.2 The Frequency Response Functions
Since the frequency response is a complex function, we can convert it to polar notation in
the complex plane. This will give us a magnitude and an angle. We call the angle the phase.

8.2.1 Amplitude Response
For each frequency, the magnitude represents the system's tendency to amplify or attenuate
the input signal.

1

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

73

Introduction to Filters
A (ω) = |H (jω)|

8.2.2 Phase Response
The phase represents the system's tendency to modify the phase of the input sinusoids.

φ (ω) = ∠H (jω).
The phase response, or its derivative the group delay, tells us how the system delays the
input signal as a function of frequency.

8.3 Examples
8.3.1 Example: Electric Circuit
Consider the following general circuit with phasor input and output voltages:

Figure 32

Where
Vo (jω) = Vom cos (ωt + θo ) = Vom ∠θo
Vi (jω) = Vim cos (ωt + θi ) = Vim ∠θi
As before, we can define the system function, H(jω) of this circuit as:
(jω)
H (jω) = VVoi (jω)
o (jω)|
Vom
A (ω) = |H (jω)| = |V
|Vi (jω)| = Vim

φ (ω) = ∠H (jω) = ∠



Vo (jω)
Vi (jω)



= ∠Vo (jω) − ∠Vi (jω) = θo − θi

Rearranging gives us the following transformations:

74

Examples
Vom = A (ω) Vim
θo = θi + φ (ω)

8.3.2 Example: Low-Pass Filter
We will illustrate this method using a simple low-pass filter with general values as an example.
This kind of circuit allows low frequencies to pass, but blocks higher ones. Find the frequency
response function, and hence the amplitude and phase response functions, of the following
RC circuit (it is already in phasor form):

Figure 33

Firstly, we use the voltage divider rule to get the output phasor in terms on the input phasor:

1

Vo (jω) = Vi (jω) · R+jωC1

jωC

Now we can easily determine the frequency response:

1

(jω)
H (jω) = VVoi (jω)
= R+jωC1

jωC

This simiplifies down to:

1
H (jω) = 1+jωRC

From here we can find the amplitude and phase responses:

75

Introduction to Filters

A (ω) = |H (jω)| = √

1
1+(ωCR)2

φ (ω) = ∠H (jω) = tan−1

 
0
1

− tan−1



ωRC
1



= − tan−1 (ωRC)

The frequency response is pictured by the plots of the amplitude and phase responses:

Figure 34

76

Examples

Figure 35

It is often easier to interpret the graphs when they are plotted on suitable logarithmic scales:

Figure 36

77

Introduction to Filters

Figure 37

This shows that the circuit is indeed a filter that removes higher frequencies. Such a filter
is called a lowpass filter. The amplitude and phase responses of an arbitrary circuit can
be plotted using an instrument called a spectrum analyser or gain and phase test set.
See Practical Electronics2 for more details on using these instruments.

8.4 Filters
An important concept to take away from these examples is that by desiging a proper system
called a filter, we can selectively attenuate or amplify certain frequency ranges. This means
that we can minimize certain unwanted frequency components (such as noise or competing
data signals), and maximize our own data signal We can define a "received signal" r as a
combination of a data signal d and unwanted components v:
r(t) = d(t) + v(t)
We can take the energy spectral density of r to determine the frequency ranges of our data
signal d. We can design a filter that will attempt to amplify these frequency ranges, and
attenuate the frequency ranges of v. We will discuss this problem and filters in general in
the next few chapters. More advanced discussions of this topic will be in the book on Signal
Processing3 .

2
3

78

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Practical_Electronics
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing

Terminology

Signals and Systems4

8.5 Terminology
When it comes to filters, there is a large amount of terminology that we need to discuss
first, so the rest of the chapters in this section will make sense.
Order (Filter Order)
The order of a filter is an integer number, that defines how complex the filter is. In common
filters, the order of the filter is the number of "stages" of the filter. Higher order filters
perform better, but they have a higher delay, and they cost more.
Pass Band
In a general sense, the passband is the frequency range of the filter that allows information
to pass. The passband is usually defined in the specifications of the filter. For instance, we
could define that we want our passband to extend from 0 to 1000 Hz, and we want the
amplitude in the entire passband to be higher than -1 db.
Transition Band
The transition band is the area of the filter between the passband and the stopband.
Higher-order filters have a thinner transition band
Stop Band
The stop band of a filter is the frequency range where the signal is attenuated. Stop band
performance is often defined in the specification for the filter. For instance, we might say
that we want to attenuate all frequencies above 5000 Hz, and we want to attenuate them
all by -40 db or more
Cut-off Frequency
The cut-off frequency of a filter is the frequency at which the filter "breaks", and changes
(between pass band and transition band, or transition band and passband, for instance).
The cut-off of a filter always has an attenuation of -3db. The -3 db point is the frequency
that is cut in power by exactly 1/2.

8.6 Lowpass
Lowpass filters allow low frequency components to pass through, while attenuating high
frequency components. Lowpass filters are some of the most important and most common
filters, and much of our analysis is going to be focused on them. Also, transformations exist
that can be used to convert the mathematical model of a lowpass filter into a model of a
highpass, bandpass, or bandstop filter. This means that we typically design lowpass filters
and then transform them into the appropriate type.

4

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

79

Introduction to Filters

8.6.1 Example: Telephone System
As an example of a lowpass filter, consider a typical telephone line. Telephone signals are
bandlimited, which means that a filter is used to prevent certain frequency components
from passing through the telephone network. Typically, the range for a phone conversation
is 10Hz to 3˙000Hz. This means that the phone line will typically incorporate a lowpass filter
that attenuates all frequency components above 3˙000Hz. This range has ben chosen because
it includes all the information humans need for clearly understanding one another, so the
effects of this filtering are not damaging to a conversation. Comparatively, CD recordings
comprise most of the human hearing and their frequency components range up to 20˙000Hz
or 20kHz.

8.7 Highpass
Highpass filters allow high frequency components to pass through, while attenuating low
frequency components.

8.7.1 Example: DSL Modems
Consider DSL modems, which are high-speed data communication devices that transmit
over the existing telephone network. DSL signals operate in the high frequency ranges,
above the 3000Hz limit for voice conversations. In order to separate the DSL data signal
from the regular voice signal, the signal must be sent into two different filters: a lowpass
filter to amplify the voice for the telephone signal, and a highpass filter to amplify the DSL
data signal.

8.8 Bandpass
A bandpass filter allows a single band of frequency information to pass the filter, but will
attenuate all frequencies above the band and below the band. A good example of a bandpass
filter is an FM radio tuner. In order to focus on one radio station, a filter must be used to
attenuate the stations at both higher and lower frequencies.

8.9 Bandstop
A bandstop filter will allow high frequencies and low frequencies to pass through the filter,
but will attenuate all frequencies that lay within a certain band.

8.10 Gain/Delay equalizers
Filters that cannot be classified into one of the above categories, are called gain or delay
equalizers. They are mainly used to equalize the gain/phase in certain parts of the frequency

80

Butterworth Filters
spectrum as needed. More discussion on these kinds of advanced topics will be in Signal
Processing5 .

Signals and Systems6
Filter design mostly bases on a limited set of widely used transfer functions. Optimization
methods allow to design other types of filters, but the functions listed here have been
studied extensively, and designs for these filters (including circuit designs to implement
them) are readily available. The filter functions presented here7 are of lowpass type,
and transformation methods8 allow to obtain other common filter types such as highpass,
bandpass or bandstop.

8.11 Butterworth Filters

Figure 38 Plot of the amplitude response of the normalized Butterworth lowpass
transfer function, for orders 1 to 5

5
6
7
8

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
#Comparison
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Transforms

81

Introduction to Filters
The Butterworth filter function9 has been designed to provide a maximally flat amplitude
response. This is obtained by the fact that all the derivatives up to the filter order minus
one are zero at DC. The amplitude response has no ripple in the passband. It is given by:
A(jω) = |H(jω)| =

q

1
1+ω 2n

It should be noted that whilst the amplitude response is very smooth, the step response
shows noticeable overshoots. They are due to the phase response wich is not linear or,
in other words, to the group delay which is not constant. The amplitude response plot
shows that the slope is 20n dB/decade, where n is the filter order. This is the general
case for all-pole lowpass filters. Zeroes in the transfer function can accentuate the slope
close to their frequency, thus masking this general rule for zero-pole lowpass filters. The
plot also shows that whatever the order of the filter, all the amplitudes cross the same
point at A(ω = 1) = √12 , which coresponds to approximatively -3 db. This -3 db reference
is often used to specify the cutoff frequency of other kinds of filters. Butterworth filters
don't have a particularly steep drop-off but, together with Chebyshev type I10 filters, they
are of all-pole kind. This particularity results in reduced hardware (or software, depending
on the implementation method), which means that for a similar complexity, higher order
Butterworth filters can be implemented, compared to functions with a steeper drop-off such
as elliptic filters11 .

9
10
11

82

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butterworth_filter
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Implementations#Chebyshev_
Type_I
#Elliptic_Filters

Butterworth Filters

8.11.1 Zeroes of the Butterworth function

Figure 39

Poles of a 4th order Butterworth filter

The normalized Butterworth function is indirectly defined by:
1
H(s) · H(−s) = 1+ω
2n

This functions has zeroes regularily placed on the unit circle. Knowing that a stable filter
has all of its poles on the left half s-plane, it is clear that the left half poles on the unit circle
belong to H(s), whilst the right half poles on the right belong to H(−s). The normalized

83

Introduction to Filters
Butterworth function has a cutoff frequency at fc = ωc /(2π) = 1/(2π)[Hz]. A different cutoff
frequency is achieved by scaling12 the circle radius to ωc = 2πfc .

8.11.2 Butterworth Transfer Function
The transfer function of a Butterworth filter is of the form:
1
H(s) = den(s)

It can also be written as a function of the poles:
H(s) = QN k
i=1

(s−pi )

With this, the denominator ploynom is found from the values of the poles.

8.12 Chebyshev Filters
In comparison to Butterworth filters, Chebyshev filters13 have a supplemental parameter: a
ripple in amplitude. This ripple, wich could be considered as non ideal, has the tremendous
advantage to allow a steeper roll-off between passband and stopband. The ripple can happen
in the passband, which is the case for Type I Chebyshev filters, or in the stopband for Type
II filters.

12
13

84

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Transforms#Lowpass_to_Lowpass
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chebyshev_filter

Chebyshev Filters

8.12.1 Chebyshev Polynomials

Figure 40

Chebyshev polynomials in the domain −1 < x < 1

Chebyshev Polynomials14 have the property to remain in the range −1 < Tn (x) < 1 for an
input in the range −1 < x < 1 and then rapidly grow outside this range. This characteristic
is a good prerequisite for devising transfer functions with limited oscillations in a given
frequency range and steep roll-offs at its borders. The Chebyshev polynomials of the first
kind are defined by the recurrence relation:
T0 (x) = 1
T1 (x) = x
Tn+1 (x) = 2x · Tn (x) − Tn−1 (x).
The first Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind are:
T0 (x) = 1
T1 (x) = x
T2 (x) = 2x2 − 1
T3 (x) = 4x3 − 3x
T4 (x) = 8x4 − 8x2 + 1

14

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chebyshev_polynomials

85

Introduction to Filters

8.12.2 Chebyshev Type I

Figure 41

Frequency response of a fourth-order type I Chebyshev filter

Chebyshev type I filters show a ripple in the passband. The amplitude response15 as a
function of angular frequency ω of the nth-order low-pass filter is:
Gn (ω) = |Hn (jω)| = r

1
1+ε2 Tn2



ω
ω0



where ε is the ripple factor, ω0 is the cutoff frequency16 and Tn () is a Chebyshev polynomial17
of order n. The passband exhibits equiripple behavior, with the ripple determined by the
ripple factor ε. In the passband, the Chebyshev polynomial alternates between √
0 and 1
2
so the filter gain will alternate between maxima at G = 1 and
√ minima at G = 1/ 1 + ε .
2
At the cutoff frequency ω0 the gain again has the value 1/ 1 + ε but continues to drop
into the stop band as the frequency increases. This behavior is shown in the diagram on
the right. The common practice of defining the cutoff frequency at −3 dB18 is usually not
applied to Chebyshev filters; instead the cutoff is taken as the point at which the gain falls
to the value of the ripple for the final time.

15
16
17
18

86

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Frequency_Response#Amplitude_
Response
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Cutoff_frequency&amp;action=edit&amp;
redlink=1
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Implementations#Chebyshev_
Polynomials
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Decibel&amp;action=edit&amp;redlink=1

Elliptic Filters

8.12.3 Chebyshev Type II

Figure 42

Frequency response of a fifth-order type II Chebyshev filter

Chebyshev Type II filters have ripples in the stopband. The amplitude response is:
Gn (ω, ω0 ) = q

1
1
2 (ω /ω)
ε Tn
0

.

1+ 2

In the stopband, the gain will always be smaller than
q1

1+ 12
ε

Also known as inverse Chebyshev, this filter function is less common because it does not
roll-off as fast as type I, and requires more components. Indeed, the transfer function
exhibits not only poles but also zeroes.

8.13 Elliptic Filters
Elliptic filters19 , also called Cauer filters, suffer from a ripple effect like Chebyshev filters.
However, unlike the type 1 and Type 2 Chebyshev filters, Elliptic filters have ripples in both
the passband and the stopband. To counteract this limitation, Elliptic filters have a very
aggressive rolloff, which often more than makes up for the ripples.
19

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cauer_filter

87

Introduction to Filters

8.14 Comparison
The following image shows a comparison between 5th order Butterworth, Chebyshev and
elliptic filter amplitude responses.

Figure 43

8.15 Bessel Filters
8.16 Filter Design
Using what we've learned so far about filters, this chapter will discuss filter design, and will
show how to make decisions as to the type of filter (Butterworth, Chebyshev, Elliptic), and
will help to show how to set parameters to acheive a set of specifications.

Signals and Systems20

20

88

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

Normalized Lowpass Filter

8.17 Normalized Lowpass Filter
When designing a filter, it is common practice to first design a normalized low-pass filter,
and then use a spectral transform to transform that low-pass filter into a different type
of filter (high-pass, band-pass, band-stop). The reason for this is because the necessary
values for designing lowpass filters are extensively described and tabulated. From this, filter
design can be reduced to the task of looking up the appropriate values in a table, and then
transforming the filter to meet the specific needs.

8.18 Lowpass to Lowpass Transformation
Converting a normalized lowpass filter to another lowpass filter allows to set the cutoff
frequency of the resulting filter. This is also called frequency scaling21 .

8.18.1 Transformation
Having a normalized transfer function, with cutoff frequency of 1 Hz, one can modify it in
order to move the cutoff frequency to a specified value fc . This is done with the help of the
following replacement:
s → fc · s

8.18.2 Transfer Function
As an example, the biquadratic transfer function22
2

Y (s)
+b1 s+b0
= ab22ss2 +a
H(s) = X(s)
1 s+a0

will be transformed into:
2 2

+b1 fc s+b0
Y (s)
= ab22ffc2 ss2 +a
H(s) = X(s)
1 fc s+a0
c

In the transfer function, all coefficients are multiplied by the corresponding power of fc .

8.18.3 Analog Element Values
If the filter is given by a circuit and its R, L and C element values found in a table, the
transfer function is scaled by changing the element values. The resistance values will stay as
they are (a further impedance scaling can be done). The capacitance values are changed
according to:
1
1
sC → sfc C

fc

21
22

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prototype_filter#Frequency_scaling
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Second_Order_Transfer_Function#
Biquadratic_Second_Order_Transfer_Function

89

Introduction to Filters
The inductance values are changed according to:
sL → sfc fLc
In the circuit, all capacitances and inductances values are divided by fc .

8.19 Lowpass to Highpass
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB23 command:
lp2hp
Converting a lowpass filter to a highpass filter is one of the easiest transformations available.
Ω Ωˆ
To transform to a highpass, we will replace all S in our equation with the following: S = pŜ p

8.20 Lowpass to Bandpass
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB24 command:
lp2bp
To Convert from a low-pass filter to a bandpass filter requires that we replace S with the
following: S =

8.21 Lowpass to Bandstop
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB25 command:
lp2bs
To convert a lowpass filter to a bandstop filter, we replace every reference to S with: S =

Signals and Systems26
The Laplace transform27 has shown to allow to analyse the frequency response28 of circuits
based on the differential equations of their capacitive and inductive components. Filter
design starts with finding the proper transfer function in order to ampify selected parts of a
signal and to damp other ones as a function of their frequency. Choosing the proper filter

23
24
25
26
27
28

90

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB_Programming
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/LaPlace_Transform
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Frequency_Response

Brick-wall filters
structure and deriving the coefficient values is a further topic prensented in the wikibook
Signal Processing29 which deals with the application of signal and systems.

8.22 Brick-wall filters
Separating signal from noise or different signals in the same transmission channel basing on
their frequency content is best done with a brick-wall filter30 which shows full transmission
in the passband and complete attenuation in the nearby stopbands, with abrupt transitions.
This can be done with the help of the Fourier transform31 which provides complete
information of the frequency content of a given signal. Having calculated a Fourier transform,
one can zero out unwanted frequency contents and calculate the inverse Fourier Transform32 ,
in order to provide the signal filtered with a brick-wall gauge. The Fourier transform33
being given by:
∞
F(f (t)) = F (jω) = −∞
f (t)e−jωt dt

R

one finds out that the Fourier transform integral, with its infinite bounds, would have to
be calculated from the day of the creation of our universe and all the way up to the day of
its decay before the integral could have been fully calculated. And only then can the ideal
brick-wall filtered signal be delivered. In more technical terms, the ideal brick-wall filter
suffers from an infinite latency.

8.23 Analog filters
The analysis of analog circuits shows that their outputs are related to their input by a set of
differential equations. The Laplace transform34 rewrites these differential equations as a set
of linear equations of the complex variable s. With this, a polynomial function multiplying
the Laplace transform of the input signal can be equated to another polynomial function
multiplying the Laplace transform of the ouput signal:
(bm sm + bm−1 sm−1 + . . . + b1 s + b0 ) · X(s) = (an sn + an−1 sn−1 + . . . + a1 s + a0 ) · Y (s)
Thus, the transfer function of a realizable analog filter can be written as the ratio of two
polynomial functions of s:
m

m−1

Y (s)
+bm−1 s
+...+b1 s+b0
= bamnssn +a
H(s) = X(s)
n−1 +...+a s+a
n−1 s
1
0

Hence, the problem of analog filter design is to find a pair of polynomial functions which,
put together, best approximate the ideal but not realizable brick-wall transfer function. In
the early days of electric signal processing, scientists have come up with filter functions35

29
30
31
32
33
34
35

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing/Filter_Design
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sinc_filter#Brick-wall_filters
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Aperiodic_Signals
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Aperiodic_Signals#Inverse_Fourier_
Transform
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Aperiodic_Signals#Fourier_Transform
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/LaPlace_Transform
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Implementations

91

Introduction to Filters
which are still largely used today. The functions they have devised are all of lowpass type.
Frequency transformation36 techniques allow to find polynomials for other filter types37
such as highpass and bandpass.

8.24 The Complex Plane
The transfer function of an analog filter is the ratio of two polynomial functions of s:
Y (s)
H(s) = X(s)
= num(s)
den(s)

Figure 44

36
37

92

The complex plane of

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Transforms
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Terminology

Designing Filters
The variable s is a complex number which can be written as s = σ + i · ω. The complex
plane is a plane with the imaginary axis vertical and the horizontal axis as the real part.
The roots of the transfer function numerator polynom are called the transfer function zeroes.
The roots of the transfer function denominator polynom are called the transfer function
poles. The transfer function can be written as a function of its zeroes zi , its poles pi and an
additional gain factor k in the form:
QM
(s−zi )
i=1
H(s) = k · QN
i=1

(s−pi )

The poles and the zeroes of a transfer function can be drawn in the complex plane. Their
position provide information about the frequency response38 of the system. Indeed, the
frequency response is equal to the transfer function taken for s = iω, which is along the
imaginary axis.
Y (iω)
X(iω) = H(s = iω)

8.24.1 Effect of Poles
A stable LTI system39 has all its poles on the left side half plane of s. If a pole would be
located on the imaginary axis, at p = iωp , then the factor 1/(s − p) of the transfer function
would be infinite at the point s = iωp and so would the global frequency response H(s = iωp ).
For poles close to the imaginary axis, the frequency response takes a large amplitude for
frequencies close to them. In other words, poles close to the imaginary axis indicate the
passband.

8.24.2 Effect of Zeros
If a zero is located on the imaginary axis, at z = iωz , then the factor (s − z) of the transfer
function is zero at the point s = iωz and so is the global frequency response H(s = iωz ).
Zeroes on, or close to the imaginary axis indicate the stopband.

8.25 Designing Filters
Devising the proper transfer function for a given filter function goes through the following
steps:
• selecting a normalized filter function40
• transforming and scaling41 the function for the particular needs
The coefficients of the numerator and denominator coefficients are finally used to calculate
the element values of a selected filter circuit42 .

38
39
40
41
42

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Frequency_Response
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing/Fourier_Analysis#LTI_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Implementations
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Transforms
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing/Analog_Filters

93

Introduction to Filters

8.25.1 Example: Lowpass Filter

Figure 45

CCITT G712 input lowpass filter specification

A reduced version of CCITT G712 input filter specification, giving only the lowpass part, is
shown in the plot on the side. The passband goes up to 3kHz and allows a maximal ripple
of 0.125dB. The stopband requires an attenuation of 14dB at 4kHz and an attenuation of
32dB above 4.6kHz.
Filter Function
As a first step, we have to choose a filter function43 . Programs such as Octave44 or Matlab
provide functions which allow to determine the minimal filter order required to fulfill a given
specification. This is a good help when choosing from the possible functions. Let's however
here arbitrarily choose a Butterworth transfer function45 .

43
44
45

94

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Implementations
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Octave_Programming_Tutorial
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Implementations#Butterworth_
Filters

Designing Filters
Normalized Filter Function
The following Octave46 script allows to plot the amplitudes of normalized Butterworth
transfer functions from order 8 to 16.
#-----------------------------------------------------------------------------# Specifications
#
fs = 40E3;
fPass = 3000;
rPass = 0.125;
fStop1 = 4000;
rStop1 = 14;
fStop2 = 4600;
rStop2 = 32;
pointNb = 1000;
AdbMin = 40;
makeGraphics = 1;
figureIndex = 0;
#==========
=====================================================================
# Normalized filter function
#
wLog = 2*pi*logspace(-1, 1, pointNb);
fc = 0.87;
Adb = [];
for order = 8:16
[num, den] = butter(order, 2*pi, 's');
while ( length(num) < length(den) )
num = [0, num];
endwhile;
Adb = [Adb; 20*log10(abs(freqs(num, den, wLog)))];
endfor
Adb(Adb < -AdbMin) = -AdbMin;
figureIndex = figureIndex+1;
figure(figureIndex);
semilogx(wLog/(2*pi), Adb);
hold on;
semilogx([wLog(1)/(2*pi), fc, fc], -[rPass, rPass, AdbMin], 'r');
semilogx([fStop1*fc/fPass, fStop1*fc/fPass, fStop2*fc/fPass,
fStop2*fc/fPass, wLog(length(wLog))/(2*pi)], ...
-[0
, rStop1, rStop1, rStop2, rStop2
], 'r');
hold off;
axis([wLog(1)/(2*pi), wLog(length(wLog))/(2*pi), -AdbMin, 0]);
grid;
xlabel('frequency [Hz]');
ylabel('amplitude [dB]');
if (makeGraphics != 0)
print -dsvg g712_butterworth_normalized.svg
endif

The following figure shows the result: one needs at least a 13th order Butterworth filter to
meet the specifications.

46

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Octave_Programming_Tutorial

95

Introduction to Filters

Figure 46

G712 butterworth normalized

On the graph, one can note that all the amplitude responses go through the same point at
-3 dB. The specification frequencies have been scaled down to fit to the normalized cutoff
frequency of 1 Hz. In the script, one might have noted an additional scaling factor of fc =
0.87: this is due to the fact that the corner cutoff amplitude is -0.125 dB and not -3 dB.
That value has been adjusted by hand for this example. Again, Octave or Matlab scripts
automate this task.
Denormalized Filter Function
The frequency scaling47 of the normalized transfer function is done by replacing s → fc ·s The
following Octave script does this by multiplying the numerator and denominator coefficients
by the appropriate power of fc .
#-----------------------------------------------------------------------------# Denormalized filter function
#
order = 13;
wLog = 2*pi*logspace(2, 5, pointNb);
fc = 0.87;

47

96

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Filter_Transforms#Lowpass_to_Lowpass

Designing Filters

[num, den] = butter(order, 2*pi, 's');
while ( length(num) < length(den) )
num = [0, num];
endwhile;
for index = 1:order+1
num(index) = num(index) * (fPass/fc)ˆ(index-1);
den(index) = den(index) * (fPass/fc)ˆ(index-1);
endfor
Adb = 20*log10(abs(freqs(num, den, wLog)));
Adb(Adb < -AdbMin) = -AdbMin;
figureIndex = figureIndex+1;
figure(figureIndex);
semilogx(wLog/(2*pi), Adb);
hold on;
semilogx([wLog(1)/(2*pi), fPass, fPass], -[rPass, rPass, AdbMin],
'r');
semilogx([fStop1, fStop1, fStop2, fStop2, wLog(length(wLog))/(2*pi)],
...
-[0
, rStop1, rStop1, rStop2, rStop2
], 'r');
hold off;
axis([wLog(1)/(2*pi), wLog(length(wLog))/(2*pi), -AdbMin, 0]);
grid;
xlabel('frequency [Hz]');
ylabel('amplitude [dB]');
if (makeGraphics != 0)
print -dsvg g712_butterworth.svg
endif

Figure 47

G712 butterworth

97

Introduction to Filters
The coefficients of the numerator and denominator coefficients are now ready to be used to
calculate the element values of a selected filter circuit48 .

48

98

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal_Processing/Analog_Filters

9 Introduction to Digital Signals
9.1 Sampled Systems
Digital signals are by essence sampled signals. In a circuit node, the numbers change at
a given rate: the sampling rate or sampling frequency. The time between two changes of
the signal is the inverse of the sampling frequency: it is the sampling period. In processor
systems, samples are stored in memory. In logic ciruits, they correspond to register outputs.
The sampling period is used to compute the next value of all signals in the system. Digital
circuits are not the only sampled systems: analog circuits such as switched capacitor filters
also rely on switches and are sampled too.

9.2 Sampling a signal
9.2.1 The Nyquist Rate
Sampling a signal raises a major question: does one lose information during this process?

Example: Checking (= sampling) the traffic lights once an hour certainly makes one
erratically react to their signalling (= loose information). On the other side, sampling the
traffic lights once per microsecond doesn't bring much more information than sampling it
every millisecond. Obviously, the traffic lights, as any other signals, have to be sampled
at a faster rate than they change, but sampling them very much faster doesn't bring more
information.
The Nyquist rate1 is the minimum sampling rate required to avoid loss of information.
def

fN = 2fb
where fb is the highest frequency of the signal to be sampled, also called bandwidth. To
avoid loosing information, the sampling rate must be higher than the Nyquist rate:
fs > fN
In practice, the sampling rate is taken with some margin, in order to more easily reconstruct
the original signal.

1

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nyquist_rate

99

Introduction to Digital Signals

Example: audio content sampling rates2 The full range of human hearing is between 20
Hz and 20 kHz. Thus, audio content has to be sampled at more than 40 kHz. And indeed:
• CD audio samples the signals at 44.1 kHz.
• Professional digital video equipment samples them at 48 kHz.
• DVD audio samples them at 96 kHz.
• High end DVD audio doubles this frequency to 192 kHz.

9.2.2 Aliasing
Sampling a signal with a rate lower than the Nyquist Rate produces aliasing3 or folding.

Figure 50

Effect of aliasing.

The picture on the right shows a red sinewave of frequency 0.9 (and thus of a period close
to 1.1). This signal should be sampled with a frequency larger than 1.8. However, the signal
has been sampled with a rate of 1 (vertical lines and black dots). If one tries to draw a line
between the samples, the result will look like the blue curve wich is a sinewave of period 10,
or of frequency 0.1. If the signal would have been sampled at a rate of 0.9, the sampling
points would always fall on the same point in the sine function and the resulting signal
would seem to be a constant. Sampling a signal of frequency 0.9 with a rate of 1 creates an
alias with the frequency of 1 − 0.9 = 0.1. Sampling a signal of frequency 0.9 with a rate of
0.9 creates an alias at DC, and so with the frequency of 0.9 − 0.9 = 0. Sampling a signal of
frequency 0.9 with a rate of 0.8 also creates an alias with the frequency of 0.9 − 0.8 = 0.1,
but with a different phase.

2
3

100

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sampling_rate
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aliasing

Sampling a signal
Example: A well known example of aliasing is the stroboscope. Illuminating a motor
turning at a frequency of 90 Hz with a stroboscope switching at 100 Hz gives us the
impression that is it turning at 100 Hz - 90 Hz = 10 Hz. Illuminating a motor turning at a
frequency of 90 Hz with a stroboscope switching at 90 Hz gives us the impression that is
it standing still. Illuminating a motor turning at a frequency of 90 Hz with a stroboscope
switching at 80 Hz gives us the impression that is it turning at 90 Hz - 80 Hz = 10 Hz, but
in the opposite direction.
It is as if the spectrum of the signal has been folded back down at a point equal to half the
sampling frequency.

9.2.3 Undersampling
Sampling a a frequency lower than the Nyquist rate, also called undersampling, creates
sinewave aliases at a lower frequency. If the original signal also has content at these lower
frequencies, then they will be mixed and there is a loss of information. However, if the signal
has only high-frequency content, then the undersampling process modulates the signal at
a lower frequency. This is a cheap alternative to modulating by the multiplication with a
modulation sinewave.

9.2.4 Oversampling
Oversampling corresponds to sampling with a frequency much higher (typically 100 to 1000)
than the Nyquist rate. The interest of oversampling is to be able to represent the signal
with a smaller amount of bits. This can be explained by the mechanism used to gain the
additional bits back: a signal sampled at 10 kHz can be downsampled at 5 kHz as long as
the new sampling frequency remains greater than the Nyquist frequency. The downsampling
implies having two times fewer samples. Rather than throwing every second sample away,
one can calculate the mean value of two consecutive samples and use this result to build
one sample of the new signal. Calculating the mean value corresponds to add the values
and divide them by two. Rather than dividing the result by two and throwing away the bit
after the decimal point, one can only add the consecutive samples two by two. With this,
the amplitude of the 5 kHz signal is twice the one of the original 10 kHz signal. In other
words, it has to be represented by 1 more bits. A largely used application of oversampling is
Pulse Width Modulation4 (PWM). The modulated signal is represented with a single bit
switching at a frequency equal to 2n · fN , where fN is the Nyquist frequency of the original
signal and n the number of bits with which it is represented. This one bit signal is ideal
to drive high-current loads with a single power switch. PWM is typically used for driving
electric motors. A more complex coding scheme for a result on a single bit is found in every
CD player: sigma-delta5 modulation. There is more theory required for understanding
its working. Let us state that it is able to represent a signal on a single bit at a lower
sampling frequency than the PWM. On the other hand, the one bit signal switches back
and forth more frequently at its sampling frequency and is thus less indicated for driving

4
5

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulse_width_modulation
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delta-sigma_modulation

101

Introduction to Digital Signals
slower high-current switches. Sigma-delta modulation is used for driving lighter loads such
as the cable between the CD player and the audio amplifier.

Example: Super Audio CD6 (SACD) The SACD codes the audio in the form of a Direct
Stream Digital7 signal coded on a single bit at 64 times the CD sampling rate of 44.1 kHz.

9.3 Z Transform
The Z Transform is used to represent sampled signals and Linear, Time Invariant8 (LTI)
systems, such as filters, in a way similar to the Laplace transform representing continuoustime signals.

9.3.1 Signal representation
The Z Transform is used to represent sampled signals in a way similar to the Laplace
transform representing continuous-time signals. A sampled signal is given by the sum of
its samples, each one delayed by a different multiple of the sampling period. The Laplace
transform represents a delay of one sampling period Ts by:
def

z −1 = e−sTs
With this, the Z-transform can be represented as
X(z) = Z{x[n]} =

P∞

n=0 x[n]z

−n

where the x[n] are the consecutive values of the sampled signal.

9.3.2 Linear time invariant systems
Continuous-time Linear Time Invariant (LTI) systems can be represented by a transfer
function which is a fraction of two polynoms of the complex variable s.
H(s) = num(s)
den(s)
Their frequency response is estimated by taking s = jω, this is by estimating the transfer
function along the imaginary axis. In order to ensure stability, the poles of the transfer
function (the roots of the denominator polynomial) must be on the left half plane of s.

6
7
8

102

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_Audio_CD
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_Stream_Digital
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems/Time_Domain_Analysis#Linear_Time_
Invariant_.28LTI.29_Systems

Z Transform

Figure 53

Z-plane unit circle

Discrete-time LTI systems can be represented by the fraction of two polynoms of the complex
variable z:
H(z) = num(z)
den(z)
From the definition:
def

z = esTs
we find that their frequency response can be estimated by taking z = ejωTs , this is by
estimating the transfer function around the unit circle. In order to ensure stability, the poles
of the transfer function (the roots of the denominator polynomial) must be inside the unit
circle.

103

Introduction to Digital Signals

9.3.3 Transfer function periodicity
The transfer function is estimated around the unit circle:
• The point at coordinate z = 1 + j0 corresponds to frequency f = 0, which is DC.
• The point at coordinate z = 0 + j1 corresponds to frequency f = fs /4, the quarter of the
sampling frequency.
• The point at coordinate z = −1 + j0 corresponds to frequency f = fs /2, half the sampling
frequency.
• The point at coordinate z = 0 − j1 corresponds to frequency f = 3/4fs .
• The point at coordinate z = 1 + j0 corresponds to frequency f = fs which is the sampling
frequency.
So having turned once around the unit circle, one falls back to the starting point z = 1 + j0.
Frome there, one can make another turn from fs to 2fs , and one more from 2fs to 3fs and
so on... On each of these turns, the frequency response will be the same. In other words, the
transfer function of a sampled system is periodic of period equal to the sampling frequency.
With real (as opposed to complex) signals, the transfer function is symmetric around half
the sampling frequency: f = fs /2. So the transfer function of a sampled system is usually
only considered between f = 0 and f = fs /2.

104

10 Appendices
Signals and Systems1

10.1 Fourier Transform
∞
F (jω) = F {f (t)} = −∞
f (t)e−jωt dt

R

10.2 Inverse Fourier Transform
1 ∞
jωt dω
F −1 {F (jω)} = f (t) = 2π
−∞ F (jω)e

R

10.3 Table of Fourier Tranforms
This table contains some of the most commonly encountered Fourier transforms.

x(t) =
F −1 {X(ω)}
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

1

Time Domain
X(ω) = F {x(t)}

Frequency Domain

∞
X(jω) = −∞
x(t)e−jωt dt
1
−0.5 + u(t)
δ(t)
δ(t − c)
u(t)
e−bt u(t) (b& > 0)
cos ω0 t
cos(ω0 t + θ)
sin ω0 t
sin(ω0 t + θ)

rect τt

τt
τsinc 2π

1 − 2|t|
pτ (t)
τ

1 ∞
jωt dω
x(t) = 2π
−∞ X(jω)e
2πδ(ω)

R

R

1
jω

1
e−jωc
1
πδ(ω) + jω
1
jω+b

π [δ(ω
+ ω0 ) + δ(ω − ω0 )]
h
i
−jθ
π e δ(ω + ω0 ) + ejθ δ(ω − ω0 )
jπ [δ(ω
+ ω0 ) − δ(ω − ω0 )]
h
i
jπ e−jθ δ(ω + ω0 ) − ejθ δ(ω − ω0 )

τ sinc τ2πω
2πpτ (ω)

τ
2 τω
2 sinc
4π

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

105

Appendices

x(t) =
F −1 {X(ω)}
15

Time Domain
X(ω) = F {x(t)}

Frequency Domain

τ
2 τt
2 sinc 4π
e−a|t| , <{a}& > 0

pτ (ω)
2π 1 − 2|ω|
τ



16
Notes:





2a
a2 +ω 2

1. sinc(x) = sin(x)/x
2. pτ (t) is the rectangular pulse function of
width τ
3. u(t) is the Heavyside
step function
4. δ(t) is the Dirac
delta function
This box:
view2 • talk3 •
edit4

Signals and Systems5

10.4 Laplace Transform
−st f (t) dt.
F (s) = L {f (t)} = 0∞
−e

R

10.5 Inverse Laplace Transform
c+i∞ f t
1
L−1 {F (s)} = 2πi
c−i∞ e F (s) ds = f (t)

R

10.6 Laplace Transform Properties
Property
Linearity
Differentiation

2
3
4
5

106

Definition
L {af (t) + bg(t)} = aF (s) + bG(s)
L{f 0 } = sL{f } − f (0− )
00
2
−
0 −
L{f
o s L{f } − sf (0 ) − f (0 )
n }=
L f (n) = sn L{f } − sn−1 f (0− ) − · · · − f (n−1) (0− )

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering_Tables/Fourier_Transform_Table
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Engineering_Tables/Fourier_Transform_
Table&amp;action=edit&amp;redlink=1
http://en.wikibooks.org//en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Engineering_Tables/
Fourier_Transform_Table&amp;action=edit
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems

Table of Laplace Transforms
Property
Frequency Division
Frequency Integration
Time Integration
Scaling
Initial value theorem
Final value theorem
Frequency Shifts
Time Shifts
Convolution Theorem

Definition
L{tf (t)} = −F 0 (s)
n
L{t
(−1)n F (n) (s)
n f (t)}
o =
R
L f (t)
= s∞ F (σ) dσ
t
nR

o

L 0t f (τ ) dτ = L {u(t) ∗ f (t)} = 1s F (s)

L {f (at)} = a1 F as
f (0+ ) = lims→∞ sF (s)
f (∞) = lims→0 sF (s)

L eat f (t) = F (s − a)
L−1 {F (s − a)} = eat f (t)
L {f (t − a)u(t − a)} = e−as F (s)
L−1 {e−as F (s)} = f (t − a)u(t − a)
L{f (t) ∗ g(t)} = F (s)G(s)

Where:
f (t) = L−1 {F (s)}
g(t) = L−1 {G(s)}
s = σ + jω

10.7 Table of Laplace Transforms

x(t) = L−1 {X(s)}
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Time Domain
X(s) = L {x(t)}
1 R σ+j∞
st
2πj σ−j∞ X(s)e ds
δ(t)
δ(t − a)
u(t)
u(t − a)
tu(t)
tn u(t)
√1 u(t)
πt
eat u(t)
tn eat u(t)
cos(ωt)u(t)
sin(ωt)u(t)
cosh(ωt)u(t)
sinh(ωt)u(t)
eat cos(ωt)u(t)
eat sin(ωt)u(t)

Laplace Domain
R∞

−∞ x(t)e

−st dt

1
e−as
1
s
e−as
s
1
s2
n!
sn+1
1
√
s
1
s−a
n!
(s−a)n+1
s
s2 +ω 2
ω
s2 +ω 2
s
s2 −ω 2
ω
s2 −ω 2
s−a
(s−a)2 +ω 2
ω
(s−a)2 +ω 2

107

Appendices

17
18

Time Domain
X(s) = L {x(t)}
1
(sin ωt − ωt cos ωt)
2ω 3
t
2ω sin ωt

19

1
2ω (sin ωt + ωt cos ωt)

x(t) = L−1 {X(s)}

Laplace Domain
1
(s2 +ω 2 )2
s
(s2 +ω 2 )2
s2
(s2 +ω 2 )2

Signals and Systems6

10.8 Useful Mathematical Identities
sin2 θ + cos2 θ = 1
sin( π2 − θ) = cos θ
sec( π2 − θ) = csc θ
sin(−θ) = − sin θ
sin 2θ = 2 sin θ cos θ
2θ
sin2 θ = 1−cos
2
α−β
sin α + sin β = 2 sin( α+β
2 ) cos( 2 )
α−β
cos α + cos β = 2 cos( α+β
2 ) cos( 2 )
1
sin α sin β = 2 [cos(α − β) − cos(α + β)]
sin α cos β = 12 [sin(α + β) + sin(α − β)]
ejθ = cos θ + j sin θ
e−jθ = cos θ − j sin θ
tan( π2 − θ) = cot θ
tan(−θ) = − tan θ
2θ
tan2 θ = 1−cos
1+cos 2θ

1 + tan2 θ = sec2 θ
cos( π2 − θ) = sin θ
csc( π2 − θ) = sec θ
cos(−θ) = sin θ
cos 2θ = cos2 − sin2 = 2 cos2 θ − 1 = 1 − 2 sin2 θ
2θ
cos2 θ = 1+cos
2
α−β
sin α − sin β = 2 cos( α+β
2 ) sin( 2 )
α−β
cos α − cos β = −2 sin( α+β
2 ) sin( 2 )
1
cos α cos β = 2 [cos(α − β) + cos(α + β)]
1 + cot2 = csc2
jθ
−jθ
cos θ = e +e
2
jθ
−jθ
sin θ = e −e
2j
cot( π2 − θ) = tan θ
2 tan θ
tan 2θ = 1−tan
2θ

Category7 :
• Signals and Systems8
Hidden category:
• Requests for expansion9

6
7
8
9

108

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Special:Categories
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Category:Signals_and_Systems
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Category:Requests_for_expansion

11 Contributors
Edits
2
1
8
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
4
1
1
65
12
5
1
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

User
A.toraby1
Adityapavan2
Adrignola3
Alshabz4
Arthurvogel5
Az15686
British7
ButterSoda8
Courcelles9
CyrilB10
Cyrus Grisham11
Darklama12
DavidCary13
Dfrankow14
Entropyslave15
Fakalaos16
Fcorthay17
Feraudyh18
Fishpi19
FliesLikeABrick20
Gautamraj21

http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:A.toraby
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Adityapavan
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Adrignola
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Alshabz
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Arthurvogel
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Az1568
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:British
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:ButterSoda
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Courcelles
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:CyrilB
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Cyrus_Grisham
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Darklama
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:DavidCary
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Dfrankow
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Entropyslave
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Fakalaos
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Fcorthay
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Feraudyh
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Fishpi
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:FliesLikeABrick
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Gautamraj

109

Contributors
1
1
3
1
18
1
1
8
12
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
8
18
1
1
1
1

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46

110

Greenbreen22
Hagindaz23
Hypergeek1424
Iarlagab25
Inductiveload26
Jdenenberg27
Jkaltes28
Jobin RV29
Jomegat30
Jpkotta31
Jwillbur32
Mattb11288533
Mcbphd134
Mcleodm35
Munkeegutz36
Nijdam37
Panic2k438
Patrick Star39
Popen40
QuiteUnusual41
Recent Runes42
RedDragonAkai43
Saptakniyogi44
Savh45
Shlomo Engelberg46

http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Greenbreen
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Hagindaz
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Hypergeek14
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Iarlagab
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Inductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Jdenenberg
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Jkaltes
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Jobin_RV
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Jomegat
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Jpkotta
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Jwillbur
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Mattb112885
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Mcbphd1
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Mcleodm
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Munkeegutz
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Nijdam
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Panic2k4
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Patrick_Star
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Popen
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:QuiteUnusual
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Recent_Runes
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:RedDragonAkai
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Saptakniyogi
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Savh
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Shlomo_Engelberg

Useful Mathematical Identities
1
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
275
1
4
4
2
4

47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

Siddhu899047
Sigma 748
Simoneau49
Sknister50
Thenub31451
Upul52
Van der Hoorn53
Vivek.cd54
WarrenSmith55
Whiteknight56
Wtachi57
Xania58
Xris59
YMS60
Yatharth61

http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Siddhu8990
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Sigma_7
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Simoneau
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Sknister
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Thenub314
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Upul
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Van_der_Hoorn
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Vivek.cd
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:WarrenSmith
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Whiteknight
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Wtachi
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Xania
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Xris
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:YMS
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Yatharth

111

List of Figures
• GFDL: Gnu Free Documentation License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html
• cc-by-sa-3.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

http://

• cc-by-sa-2.5: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 2.5 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5/

http://

• cc-by-sa-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 2.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/

http://

• cc-by-sa-1.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 1.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/1.0/

http://

• cc-by-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0/
• cc-by-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en
• cc-by-2.5: Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.5/deed.en
• cc-by-3.0: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en
• GPL: GNU General Public License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.txt
• LGPL: GNU Lesser General Public License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.
html
• PD: This image is in the public domain.
• ATTR: The copyright holder of this file allows anyone to use it for any purpose,
provided that the copyright holder is properly attributed. Redistribution, derivative
work, commercial use, and all other use is permitted.
• EURO: This is the common (reverse) face of a euro coin. The copyright on the design
of the common face of the euro coins belongs to the European Commission. Authorised
is reproduction in a format without relief (drawings, paintings, films) provided they
are not detrimental to the image of the euro.
• LFK: Lizenz Freie Kunst. http://artlibre.org/licence/lal/de
• CFR: Copyright free use.

113

List of Figures
• EPL: Eclipse Public License. http://www.eclipse.org/org/documents/epl-v10.
php
Copies of the GPL, the LGPL as well as a GFDL are included in chapter Licenses62 . Please
note that images in the public domain do not require attribution. You may click on the
image numbers in the following table to open the webpage of the images in your webbrower.

62

114

Chapter 12 on page 117

List of Figures

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83

The people from the Tango! project63

Inductiveload64
Inductiveload65
Inductiveload66
Inductiveload67
Inductiveload68
Inductiveload69
Inductiveload70
El T71
Inductiveload72
Inductiveload73
Inductiveload74
Inductiveload75
Inductiveload76
Inductiveload77
Inductiveload78
Inductiveload79
Inductiveload80
Inductiveload81
Inductiveload82
Artwork by Tuomas Kuosmanen <tigert_at_ximian.com>
and Jakub Steiner <jimmac_at_ximian.com>
Inductiveload83

PD
PD
PD
GFDL
GFDL
GFDL
GFDL
GFDL
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
GPL
PD

http://tango.freedesktop.org/The_People
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/%3Aw%3Aen%3AEl%20T
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload

115

List of Figures

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

116

Inductiveload84
Inductiveload85
Inductiveload86
Inductiveload87
Inductiveload88
Inductiveload89
Inductiveload90
Inductiveload91
Fcorthay92
Inductiveload93
Inductiveload94
User:PAR
Alessio Damato95
Fcorthay96
Fcorthay97
Fcorthay98
Artwork by Tuomas Kuosmanen <tigert_at_ximian.com>
and Jakub Steiner <jimmac_at_ximian.com>
Artwork by Tuomas Kuosmanen <tigert_at_ximian.com>
and Jakub Steiner <jimmac_at_ximian.com>
Moxfyre99
Artwork by Tuomas Kuosmanen <tigert_at_ximian.com>
and Jakub Steiner <jimmac_at_ximian.com>
Artwork by Tuomas Kuosmanen <tigert_at_ximian.com>
and Jakub Steiner <jimmac_at_ximian.com>
Fcorthay100

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AFcorthay
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AInductiveload
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AAlejo2083
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AFcorthay
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AFcorthay
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AFcorthay
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AMoxfyre
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User%3AFcorthay

PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
cc-by-sa-3.0
PD
PD
PD
GFDL
GFDL
cc-by-sa-3.0
GFDL
GFDL
GPL
GPL
GFDL
GPL
GPL
cc-by-sa-3.0

12 Licenses
12.1 GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright © 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
<http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
it is not allowed. Preamble
The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft
license for software and other kinds of works.
The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed to take away your freedom
to share and change the works. By contrast, the
GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change all versions
of a program–to make sure it remains free software
for all its users. We, the Free Software Foundation,
use the GNU General Public License for most of our
software; it applies also to any other work released
this way by its authors. You can apply it to your
programs, too.
When we speak of free software, we are referring
to freedom, not price.
Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have
the freedom to distribute copies of free software
(and charge for them if you wish), that you receive
source code or can get it if you want it, that you
can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs, and that you know you can do these
things.
To protect your rights, we need to prevent others
from denying you these rights or asking you to surrender the rights. Therefore, you have certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it: responsibilities to respect
the freedom of others.
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must pass
on to the recipients the same freedoms that you received. You must make sure that they, too, receive
or can get the source code. And you must show
them these terms so they know their rights.
Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your
rights with two steps: (1) assert copyright on the
software, and (2) offer you this License giving you
legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify
it.
For the developers’ and authors’ protection, the
GPL clearly explains that there is no warranty for
this free software. For both users’ and authors’
sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be
marked as changed, so that their problems will not
be attributed erroneously to authors of previous
versions.
Some devices are designed to deny users access to
install or run modified versions of the software inside them, although the manufacturer can do so.
This is fundamentally incompatible with the aim
of protecting users’ freedom to change the software.
The systematic pattern of such abuse occurs in the
area of products for individuals to use, which is
precisely where it is most unacceptable. Therefore,
we have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the practice for those products. If such problems arise substantially in other domains, we stand
ready to extend this provision to those domains in
future versions of the GPL, as needed to protect
the freedom of users.
Finally, every program is threatened constantly by
software patents. States should not allow patents
to restrict development and use of software on
general-purpose computers, but in those that do,
we wish to avoid the special danger that patents
applied to a free program could make it effectively
proprietary. To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program nonfree.
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow. TERMS AND
CONDITIONS 0. Definitions.
“This License” refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public License.
“Copyright” also means copyright-like laws that apply to other kinds of works, such as semiconductor
masks.
“The Program” refers to any copyrightable work
licensed under this License. Each licensee is addressed as “you”. “Licensees” and “recipients” may
be individuals or organizations.
To “modify” a work means to copy from or adapt
all or part of the work in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the making of an exact
copy. The resulting work is called a “modified version” of the earlier work or a work “based on” the
earlier work.
A “covered work” means either the unmodified Program or a work based on the Program.
To “propagate” a work means to do anything with it
that, without permission, would make you directly
or secondarily liable for infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing it on a computer or modifying a private copy. Propagation includes copying, distribution (with or without modification), making available to the public, and in
some countries other activities as well.
To “convey” a work means any kind of propagation
that enables other parties to make or receive copies.
Mere interaction with a user through a computer

network, with no transfer of a copy, is not conveying.
An interactive user interface displays “Appropriate
Legal Notices” to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently visible feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and (2) tells
the user that there is no warranty for the work (except to the extent that warranties are provided),
that licensees may convey the work under this License, and how to view a copy of this License. If
the interface presents a list of user commands or
options, such as a menu, a prominent item in the
list meets this criterion. 1. Source Code.
The “source code” for a work means the preferred
form of the work for making modifications to it.
“Object code” means any non-source form of a
work.
A “Standard Interface” means an interface that either is an official standard defined by a recognized
standards body, or, in the case of interfaces specified for a particular programming language, one
that is widely used among developers working in
that language.
The “System Libraries” of an executable work include anything, other than the work as a whole,
that (a) is included in the normal form of packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of
that Major Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with that Major Component,
or to implement a Standard Interface for which an
implementation is available to the public in source
code form. A “Major Component”, in this context,
means a major essential component (kernel, window
system, and so on) of the specific operating system
(if any) on which the executable work runs, or a
compiler used to produce the work, or an object
code interpreter used to run it.
The “Corresponding Source” for a work in object
code form means all the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable work) run
the object code and to modify the work, including
scripts to control those activities. However, it does
not include the work’s System Libraries, or generalpurpose tools or generally available free programs
which are used unmodified in performing those activities but which are not part of the work. For
example, Corresponding Source includes interface
definition files associated with source files for the
work, and the source code for shared libraries and
dynamically linked subprograms that the work is
specifically designed to require, such as by intimate
data communication or control flow between those
subprograms and other parts of the work.
The Corresponding Source need not include anything that users can regenerate automatically from
other parts of the Corresponding Source.
The Corresponding Source for a work in source code
form is that same work. 2. Basic Permissions.
All rights granted under this License are granted
for the term of copyright on the Program, and are
irrevocable provided the stated conditions are met.
This License explicitly affirms your unlimited permission to run the unmodified Program. The output from running a covered work is covered by this
License only if the output, given its content, constitutes a covered work. This License acknowledges
your rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyright law.
You may make, run and propagate covered works
that you do not convey, without conditions so long
as your license otherwise remains in force. You may
convey covered works to others for the sole purpose
of having them make modifications exclusively for
you, or provide you with facilities for running those
works, provided that you comply with the terms
of this License in conveying all material for which
you do not control copyright. Those thus making or
running the covered works for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your direction and control, on terms that prohibit them from making any
copies of your copyrighted material outside their
relationship with you.
Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under the conditions stated below. Sublicensing is not allowed; section 10 makes it unnecessary. 3. Protecting Users’ Legal Rights From AntiCircumvention Law.
No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological measure under any applicable law
fulfilling obligations under article 11 of the WIPO
copyright treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, or
similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such measures.

You may charge any price or no price for each copy
that you convey, and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee. 5. Conveying Modified
Source Versions.
You may convey a work based on the Program, or
the modifications to produce it from the Program,
in the form of source code under the terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:
* a) The work must carry prominent notices stating
that you modified it, and giving a relevant date. *
b) The work must carry prominent notices stating
that it is released under this License and any conditions added under section 7. This requirement
modifies the requirement in section 4 to “keep intact all notices”. * c) You must license the entire
work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who
comes into possession of a copy. This License will
therefore apply, along with any applicable section 7
additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all
its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This
License gives no permission to license the work in
any other way, but it does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received it. * d) If
the work has interactive user interfaces, each must
display Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the
Program has interactive interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal Notices, your work need not
make them do so.
A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent works, which are not by their
nature extensions of the covered work, and which
are not combined with it such as to form a larger
program, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an “aggregate” if the compilation and its resulting copyright are not used to
limit the access or legal rights of the compilation’s
users beyond what the individual works permit. Inclusion of a covered work in an aggregate does not
cause this License to apply to the other parts of the
aggregate. 6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.
You may convey a covered work in object code form
under the terms of sections 4 and 5, provided that
you also convey the machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this License, in one
of these ways:
* a) Convey the object code in, or embodied in,
a physical product (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by the Corresponding
Source fixed on a durable physical medium customarily used for software interchange. * b) Convey the
object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
(including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by a written offer, valid for at least three
years and valid for as long as you offer spare parts
or customer support for that product model, to
give anyone who possesses the object code either
(1) a copy of the Corresponding Source for all the
software in the product that is covered by this License, on a durable physical medium customarily
used for software interchange, for a price no more
than your reasonable cost of physically performing
this conveying of source, or (2) access to copy the
Corresponding Source from a network server at no
charge. * c) Convey individual copies of the object
code with a copy of the written offer to provide
the Corresponding Source. This alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercially, and
only if you received the object code with such an offer, in accord with subsection 6b. * d) Convey the
object code by offering access from a designated
place (gratis or for a charge), and offer equivalent
access to the Corresponding Source in the same way
through the same place at no further charge. You
need not require recipients to copy the Corresponding Source along with the object code. If the place
to copy the object code is a network server, the Corresponding Source may be on a different server (operated by you or a third party) that supports equivalent copying facilities, provided you maintain clear
directions next to the object code saying where to
find the Corresponding Source. Regardless of what
server hosts the Corresponding Source, you remain
obligated to ensure that it is available for as long
as needed to satisfy these requirements. * e) Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission,
provided you inform other peers where the object
code and Corresponding Source of the work are being offered to the general public at no charge under
subsection 6d.
A separable portion of the object code, whose
source code is excluded from the Corresponding
Source as a System Library, need not be included
in conveying the object code work.

When you convey a covered work, you waive any
legal power to forbid circumvention of technological measures to the extent such circumvention is effected by exercising rights under this License with
respect to the covered work, and you disclaim any
intention to limit operation or modification of the
work as a means of enforcing, against the work’s
users, your or third parties’ legal rights to forbid
circumvention of technological measures. 4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.

A “User Product” is either (1) a “consumer product”, which means any tangible personal property
which is normally used for personal, family, or
household purposes, or (2) anything designed or
sold for incorporation into a dwelling. In determining whether a product is a consumer product,
doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of coverage. For a particular product received by a particular user, “normally used” refers to a typical or
common use of that class of product, regardless of
the status of the particular user or of the way in
which the particular user actually uses, or expects
or is expected to use, the product. A product is a
consumer product regardless of whether the product has substantial commercial, industrial or nonconsumer uses, unless such uses represent the only
significant mode of use of the product.

You may convey verbatim copies of the Program’s
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately
publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice; keep intact all notices stating that this License
and any non-permissive terms added in accord with
section 7 apply to the code; keep intact all notices
of the absence of any warranty; and give all recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.

“Installation Information” for a User Product
means any methods, procedures, authorization
keys, or other information required to install and
execute modified versions of a covered work in that
User Product from a modified version of its Corresponding Source. The information must suffice to
ensure that the continued functioning of the modified object code is in no case prevented or interfered
with solely because modification has been made.

If you convey an object code work under this section in, or with, or specifically for use in, a User
Product, and the conveying occurs as part of a
transaction in which the right of possession and
use of the User Product is transferred to the recipient in perpetuity or for a fixed term (regardless of how the transaction is characterized), the
Corresponding Source conveyed under this section
must be accompanied by the Installation Information. But this requirement does not apply if neither
you nor any third party retains the ability to install
modified object code on the User Product (for example, the work has been installed in ROM).
The requirement to provide Installation Information does not include a requirement to continue to
provide support service, warranty, or updates for a
work that has been modified or installed by the recipient, or for the User Product in which it has been
modified or installed. Access to a network may be
denied when the modification itself materially and
adversely affects the operation of the network or
violates the rules and protocols for communication
across the network.
Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation
Information provided, in accord with this section
must be in a format that is publicly documented
(and with an implementation available to the public
in source code form), and must require no special
password or key for unpacking, reading or copying.
7. Additional Terms.
“Additional permissions” are terms that supplement
the terms of this License by making exceptions from
one or more of its conditions. Additional permissions that are applicable to the entire Program
shall be treated as though they were included in
this License, to the extent that they are valid under applicable law. If additional permissions apply
only to part of the Program, that part may be used
separately under those permissions, but the entire
Program remains governed by this License without
regard to the additional permissions.
When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may
at your option remove any additional permissions
from that copy, or from any part of it. (Additional
permissions may be written to require their own removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)
You may place additional permissions on material,
added by you to a covered work, for which you have
or can give appropriate copyright permission.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for material you add to a covered work, you
may (if authorized by the copyright holders of that
material) supplement the terms of this License with
terms:
* a) Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently from the terms of sections 15 and 16 of this
License; or * b) Requiring preservation of specified
reasonable legal notices or author attributions in
that material or in the Appropriate Legal Notices
displayed by works containing it; or * c) Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that material,
or requiring that modified versions of such material
be marked in reasonable ways as different from the
original version; or * d) Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of licensors or authors of
the material; or * e) Declining to grant rights under
trademark law for use of some trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or * f) Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of that material
by anyone who conveys the material (or modified
versions of it) with contractual assumptions of liability to the recipient, for any liability that these
contractual assumptions directly impose on those
licensors and authors.
All other non-permissive additional terms are considered “further restrictions” within the meaning of
section 10. If the Program as you received it, or any
part of it, contains a notice stating that it is governed by this License along with a term that is a
further restriction, you may remove that term. If a
license document contains a further restriction but
permits relicensing or conveying under this License,
you may add to a covered work material governed
by the terms of that license document, provided
that the further restriction does not survive such
relicensing or conveying.
If you add terms to a covered work in accord with
this section, you must place, in the relevant source
files, a statement of the additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indicating where to
find the applicable terms.
Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive,
may be stated in the form of a separately written
license, or stated as exceptions; the above requirements apply either way. 8. Termination.
You may not propagate or modify a covered work
except as expressly provided under this License.
Any attempt otherwise to propagate or modify it is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights
under this License (including any patent licenses
granted under the third paragraph of section 11).
However, if you cease all violation of this License,
then your license from a particular copyright holder
is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the
copyright holder explicitly and finally terminates
your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
holder fails to notify you of the violation by some
reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright
holder is reinstated permanently if the copyright
holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have received
notice of violation of this License (for any work)

from that copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the
notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does
not terminate the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under this License.
If your rights have been terminated and not permanently reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new
licenses for the same material under section 10. 9.
Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.
You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or run a copy of the Program. Ancillary propagation of a covered work occurring solely
as a consequence of using peer-to-peer transmission
to receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance. However, nothing other than this License
grants you permission to propagate or modify any
covered work. These actions infringe copyright if
you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or propagating a covered work, you indicate
your acceptance of this License to do so. 10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.
Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient
automatically receives a license from the original
licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work,
subject to this License. You are not responsible
for enforcing compliance by third parties with this
License.
An “entity transaction” is a transaction transferring control of an organization, or substantially all
assets of one, or subdividing an organization, or
merging organizations. If propagation of a covered work results from an entity transaction, each
party to that transaction who receives a copy of the
work also receives whatever licenses to the work the
party’s predecessor in interest had or could give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to possession of the Corresponding Source of the work from
the predecessor in interest, if the predecessor has it
or can get it with reasonable efforts.
You may not impose any further restrictions on the
exercise of the rights granted or affirmed under this
License. For example, you may not impose a license
fee, royalty, or other charge for exercise of rights
granted under this License, and you may not initiate litigation (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that any patent claim
is infringed by making, using, selling, offering for
sale, or importing the Program or any portion of it.
11. Patents.
A “contributor” is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this License of the Program or a
work on which the Program is based. The work
thus licensed is called the contributor’s “contributor version”.
A contributor’s “essential patent claims” are all
patent claims owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acquired or hereafter acquired,
that would be infringed by some manner, permitted by this License, of making, using, or selling its
contributor version, but do not include claims that
would be infringed only as a consequence of further
modification of the contributor version. For purposes of this definition, “control” includes the right
to grant patent sublicenses in a manner consistent
with the requirements of this License.
Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free patent license under the contributor’s essential patent claims, to make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise run, modify and
propagate the contents of its contributor version.

In the following three paragraphs, a “patent license” is any express agreement or commitment,
however denominated, not to enforce a patent (such
as an express permission to practice a patent or
covenant not to sue for patent infringement). To
“grant” such a patent license to a party means to
make such an agreement or commitment not to enforce a patent against the party.
If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying
on a patent license, and the Corresponding Source
of the work is not available for anyone to copy,
free of charge and under the terms of this License,
through a publicly available network server or other
readily accessible means, then you must either (1)
cause the Corresponding Source to be so available,
or (2) arrange to deprive yourself of the benefit
of the patent license for this particular work, or
(3) arrange, in a manner consistent with the requirements of this License, to extend the patent
license to downstream recipients. “Knowingly relying” means you have actual knowledge that, but
for the patent license, your conveying the covered
work in a country, or your recipient’s use of the covered work in a country, would infringe one or more
identifiable patents in that country that you have
reason to believe are valid.
If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction or arrangement, you convey, or propagate
by procuring conveyance of, a covered work, and
grant a patent license to some of the parties receiving the covered work authorizing them to use,
propagate, modify or convey a specific copy of the
covered work, then the patent license you grant is
automatically extended to all recipients of the covered work and works based on it.
A patent license is “discriminatory” if it does not include within the scope of its coverage, prohibits the
exercise of, or is conditioned on the non-exercise
of one or more of the rights that are specifically
granted under this License. You may not convey a
covered work if you are a party to an arrangement
with a third party that is in the business of distributing software, under which you make payment
to the third party based on the extent of your activity of conveying the work, and under which the
third party grants, to any of the parties who would
receive the covered work from you, a discriminatory patent license (a) in connection with copies
of the covered work conveyed by you (or copies
made from those copies), or (b) primarily for and in
connection with specific products or compilations
that contain the covered work, unless you entered
into that arrangement, or that patent license was
granted, prior to 28 March 2007.
Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or limiting any implied license or other defenses to infringement that may otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law. 12. No
Surrender of Others’ Freedom.
If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court
order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the
conditions of this License, they do not excuse you
from the conditions of this License. If you cannot
convey a covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any
other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence
you may not convey it at all. For example, if you
agree to terms that obligate you to collect a royalty for further conveying from those to whom you
convey the Program, the only way you could satisfy
both those terms and this License would be to refrain entirely from conveying the Program. 13. Use
with the GNU Affero General Public License.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have permission to link or combine any
covered work with a work licensed under version
3 of the GNU Affero General Public License into
a single combined work, and to convey the resulting work. The terms of this License will continue
to apply to the part which is the covered work, but
the special requirements of the GNU Affero General
Public License, section 13, concerning interaction
through a network will apply to the combination
as such. 14. Revised Versions of this License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised
and/or new versions of the GNU General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be
similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU General Public License
“or any later version” applies to it, you have the
option of following the terms and conditions either
of that numbered version or of any later version
published by the Free Software Foundation. If the
Program does not specify a version number of the
GNU General Public License, you may choose any
version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.
If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide
which future versions of the GNU General Public
License can be used, that proxy’s public statement
of acceptance of a version permanently authorizes
you to choose that version for the Program.
Later license versions may give you additional or
different permissions. However, no additional obligations are imposed on any author or copyright
holder as a result of your choosing to follow a later
version. 15. Disclaimer of Warranty.
THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE
STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE
PROGRAM “AS IS” WITHOUT WARRANTY OF
ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND
PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH
YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.
16. Limitation of Liability.
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY
OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES AND/OR CONVEYS THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE,
BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE
THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED
BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE
OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY
OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER
OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF
THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.
If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided above cannot be given local legal ef-

fect according to their terms, reviewing courts shall
apply local law that most closely approximates an
absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection
with the Program, unless a warranty or assumption
of liability accompanies a copy of the Program in
return for a fee.
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
If you develop a new program, and you want it to
be of the greatest possible use to the public, the
best way to achieve this is to make it free software
which everyone can redistribute and change under
these terms.
To do so, attach the following notices to the program. It is safest to attach them to the start of
each source file to most effectively state the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the “copyright” line and a pointer to where the full
notice is found.
<one line to give the program’s name and a brief
idea of what it does.> Copyright (C) <year>
<name of author>
This program is free software: you can redistribute
it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU
General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
This program is distributed in the hope that
it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public
License for more details.
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program. If not,
see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.
If the program does terminal interaction, make it
output a short notice like this when it starts in an
interactive mode:
<program> Copyright (C) <year> <name of author> This program comes with ABSOLUTELY
NO WARRANTY; for details type ‘show w’. This is
free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
under certain conditions; type ‘show c’ for details.
The hypothetical commands ‘show w’ and ‘show c’
should show the appropriate parts of the General
Public License. Of course, your program’s commands might be different; for a GUI interface, you
would use an “about box”.
You should also get your employer (if you work
as a programmer) or school, if any, to sign a
“copyright disclaimer” for the program, if necessary.
For more information on this, and
how to apply and follow the GNU GPL, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
The GNU General Public License does not permit
incorporating your program into proprietary programs. If your program is a subroutine library, you
may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the library. If this is
what you want to do, use the GNU Lesser General
Public License instead of this License. But first,
please read <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/whynot-lgpl.html>.

12.2 GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.3, 3 November 2008
Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
it is not allowed. 0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual,
textbook, or other functional and useful document
"free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
with or without modifying it, either commercially
or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered
responsible for modifications made by others.
This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means
that derivative works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements
the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it
for manuals for free software, because free software
needs free documentation: a free program should
come with manuals providing the same freedoms
that the software does. But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether
it is published as a printed book. We recommend
this License principally for works whose purpose is
instruction or reference. 1. APPLICABILITY AND
DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work,
in any medium, that contains a notice placed by the
copyright holder saying it can be distributed under
the terms of this License. Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that work under the conditions stated
herein. The "Document", below, refers to any such
manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You accept the
license if you copy, modify or distribute the work
in a way requiring permission under copyright law.
A "Modified Version" of the Document means any
work containing the Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
translated into another language.
A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a
front-matter section of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or

authors of the Document to the Document’s overall
subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook
of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be
a matter of historical connection with the subject
or with related matters, or of legal, commercial,
philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.
The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are designated, as being those of
Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the
Document is released under this License. If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary
then it is not allowed to be designated as Invariant.
The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections.
If the Document does not identify any Invariant
Sections then there are none.
The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text
that are listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover
Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is
released under this License. A Front-Cover Text
may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text
may be at most 25 words.
A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a
machine-readable copy, represented in a format
whose specification is available to the general public, that is suitable for revising the document
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for
images composed of pixels) generic paint programs
or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to text formatters. A copy
made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose
markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged
to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by
readers is not Transparent. An image format is not
Transparent if used for any substantial amount of
text. A copy that is not "Transparent" is called
"Opaque".
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent
copies include plain ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or
XML using a publicly available DTD, and standardconforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification. Examples of transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG.
Opaque formats include proprietary formats that
can be read and edited only by proprietary word
processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD
and/or processing tools are not generally available,
and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or

PDF produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.
The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the
title page itself, plus such following pages as are
needed to hold, legibly, the material this License
requires to appear in the title page. For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such,
"Title Page" means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work’s title, preceding the
beginning of the body of the text.
The "publisher" means any person or entity that
distributes copies of the Document to the public.
A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit
of the Document whose title either is precisely XYZ
or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that
translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ
stands for a specific section name mentioned below,
such as "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title"
of such a section when you modify the Document
means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers
next to the notice which states that this License
applies to the Document.
These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference
in this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other implication that these Warranty
Disclaimers may have is void and has no effect on
the meaning of this License. 2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any
medium, either commercially or noncommercially,
provided that this License, the copyright notices,
and the license notice saying this License applies to
the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that
you add no other conditions whatsoever to those
of this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept compensation in exchange for
copies. If you distribute a large enough number of
copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may publicly display
copies. 3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media
that commonly have printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document’s license notice requires Cover Texts, you

must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly
and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover
Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts
on the back cover. Both covers must also clearly
and legibly identify you as the publisher of these
copies. The front cover must present the full title
with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible. You may add other material on the covers
in addition. Copying with changes limited to the
covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put the first ones
listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual
cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the
Document numbering more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy
along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with
each Opaque copy a computer-network location
from which the general network-using public has
access to download using public-standard network
protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps,
when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in
quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will
remain thus accessible at the stated location until
at least one year after the last time you distribute
an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or
retailers) of that edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them
a chance to provide you with an updated version of
the Document. 4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of
the Document under the conditions of sections 2
and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the
Modified Version filling the role of the Document,
thus licensing distribution and modification of the
Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it.
In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:
* A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if
any) a title distinct from that of the Document,
and from those of previous versions (which should,
if there were any, be listed in the History section
of the Document). You may use the same title as
a previous version if the original publisher of that
version gives permission. * B. List on the Title

Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in
the Modified Version, together with at least five of
the principal authors of the Document (all of its
principal authors, if it has fewer than five), unless
they release you from this requirement. * C. State
on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
Modified Version, as the publisher. * D. Preserve
all the copyright notices of the Document. * E. Add
an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the other copyright notices. * F.
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a
license notice giving the public permission to use
the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below. *
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required Cover Texts given in
the Document’s license notice. * H. Include an unaltered copy of this License. * I. Preserve the section
Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to it
an item stating at least the title, year, new authors,
and publisher of the Modified Version as given on
the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating the title,
year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous
sentence. * J. Preserve the network location, if any,
given in the Document for public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given in the Document for previous
versions it was based on. These may be placed in
the "History" section. You may omit a network location for a work that was published at least four
years before the Document itself, or if the original
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
* K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements"
or "Dedications", Preserve the Title of the section,
and preserve in the section all the substance and
tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
and/or dedications given therein. * L. Preserve all
the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered
in their text and in their titles. Section numbers or
the equivalent are not considered part of the section
titles. * M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be included in the
Modified Version. * N. Do not retitle any existing
section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to conflict
in title with any Invariant Section. * O. Preserve
any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter
sections or appendices that qualify as Secondary
Sections and contain no material copied from the
Document, you may at your option designate some
or all of these sections as invariant. To do this, add
their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the
Modified Version’s license notice. These titles must
be distinct from any other section titles.
You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements",
provided it contains nothing but endorsements of
your Modified Version by various parties—for example, statements of peer review or that the text
has been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a
Front-Cover Text, and a passage of up to 25 words
as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover
Texts in the Modified Version. Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may
be added by (or through arrangements made by)
any one entity. If the Document already includes
a cover text for the same cover, previously added
by you or by arrangement made by the same entity
you are acting on behalf of, you may not add an-

other; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added
the old one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do
not by this License give permission to use their
names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version. 5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License, under the terms
defined in section 4 above for modified versions,
provided that you include in the combination all
of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant
Sections of your combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of
this License, and multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there
are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name
but different contents, make the title of each such
section unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher
of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in
the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice
of the combined work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections
Entitled "History" in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications".
You must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements". 6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy
that is included in the collection, provided that you
follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying
of each of the documents in all other respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License
into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document. 7. AGGREGATION WITH
INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives
with other separate and independent documents or
works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution
medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the
legal rights of the compilation’s users beyond what
the individual works permit. When the Document
is included in an aggregate, this License does not
apply to the other works in the aggregate which are
not themselves derivative works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Document, then if the
Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document’s Cover Texts may be placed
on covers that bracket the Document within the
aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of covers
if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise
they must appear on printed covers that bracket
the whole aggregate. 8. TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so
you may distribute translations of the Document
under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant
Sections with translations requires special permission from their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all Invariant Sections
in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include a translation of this
License, and all the license notices in the Document,
and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you
also include the original English version of this License and the original versions of those notices and
disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the
translation and the original version of this License
or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will
prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section
1) will typically require changing the actual title.
9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute
the Document except as expressly provided under
this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute it is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, if you cease all violation of this License,
then your license from a particular copyright holder
is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the
copyright holder explicitly and finally terminates
your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
holder fails to notify you of the violation by some
reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright
holder is reinstated permanently if the copyright
holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have received
notice of violation of this License (for any work)
from that copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the
notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does
not terminate the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under this License.
If your rights have been terminated and not permanently reinstated, receipt of a copy of some or all
of the same material does not give you any rights
to use it. 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be
similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the Document specifies that
a particular numbered version of this License "or
any later version" applies to it, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of
that specified version or of any later version that
has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify
a version number of this License, you may choose
any version ever published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation. If the Document specifies that a proxy can decide which future versions of

this License can be used, that proxy’s public statement of acceptance of a version permanently authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.
11. RELICENSING
"Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site" (or
"MMC Site") means any World Wide Web server
that publishes copyrightable works and also provides prominent facilities for anybody to edit those
works. A public wiki that anybody can edit is
an example of such a server. A "Massive Multiauthor Collaboration" (or "MMC") contained in the
site means any set of copyrightable works thus published on the MMC site.
"CC-BY-SA"
means
the
Creative
Commons
Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 license published by
Creative Commons Corporation, a not-for-profit
corporation with a principal place of business in
San Francisco, California, as well as future copyleft
versions of that license published by that same
organization.
"Incorporate" means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or in part, as part of another Document.
An MMC is "eligible for relicensing" if it is licensed
under this License, and if all works that were first
published under this License somewhere other than
this MMC, and subsequently incorporated in whole
or in part into the MMC, (1) had no cover texts or
invariant sections, and (2) were thus incorporated
prior to November 1, 2008.
The operator of an MMC Site may republish an
MMC contained in the site under CC-BY-SA on the
same site at any time before August 1, 2009, provided the MMC is eligible for relicensing. ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents
To use this License in a document you have written,
include a copy of the License in the document and
put the following copyright and license notices just
after the title page:
Copyright (C) YEAR YOUR NAME. Permission is
granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no
Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is included
in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation
License".
If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts
and Back-Cover Texts, replace the "with . . .
Texts." line with this:
with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and
with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts,
or some other combination of the three, merge
those two alternatives to suit the situation.
If your document contains nontrivial examples of
program code, we recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free software
license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

12.3 GNU Lesser General Public License
GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright © 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
<http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
it is not allowed.
This version of the GNU Lesser General Public License incorporates the terms and conditions of version 3 of the GNU General Public License, supplemented by the additional permissions listed below.
0. Additional Definitions.
As used herein, “this License” refers to version 3
of the GNU Lesser General Public License, and the
“GNU GPL” refers to version 3 of the GNU General
Public License.
“The Library” refers to a covered work governed by
this License, other than an Application or a Combined Work as defined below.
An “Application” is any work that makes use of an
interface provided by the Library, but which is not
otherwise based on the Library. Defining a subclass
of a class defined by the Library is deemed a mode
of using an interface provided by the Library.
A “Combined Work” is a work produced by combining or linking an Application with the Library.
The particular version of the Library with which
the Combined Work was made is also called the
“Linked Version”.
The “Minimal Corresponding Source” for a Combined Work means the Corresponding Source for
the Combined Work, excluding any source code for
portions of the Combined Work that, considered in
isolation, are based on the Application, and not on
the Linked Version.

The “Corresponding Application Code” for a Combined Work means the object code and/or source
code for the Application, including any data and
utility programs needed for reproducing the Combined Work from the Application, but excluding the
System Libraries of the Combined Work. 1. Exception to Section 3 of the GNU GPL.
You may convey a covered work under sections 3
and 4 of this License without being bound by section 3 of the GNU GPL. 2. Conveying Modified
Versions.
If you modify a copy of the Library, and, in your
modifications, a facility refers to a function or data
to be supplied by an Application that uses the facility (other than as an argument passed when the
facility is invoked), then you may convey a copy of
the modified version:
* a) under this License, provided that you make a
good faith effort to ensure that, in the event an Application does not supply the function or data, the
facility still operates, and performs whatever part
of its purpose remains meaningful, or * b) under
the GNU GPL, with none of the additional permissions of this License applicable to that copy.
3. Object Code Incorporating Material from Library Header Files.
The object code form of an Application may incorporate material from a header file that is part of
the Library. You may convey such object code under terms of your choice, provided that, if the incorporated material is not limited to numerical parameters, data structure layouts and accessors, or
small macros, inline functions and templates (ten
or fewer lines in length), you do both of the following:
* a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the
object code that the Library is used in it and that
the Library and its use are covered by this License.
* b) Accompany the object code with a copy of the
GNU GPL and this license document.

4. Combined Works.
You may convey a Combined Work under terms of
your choice that, taken together, effectively do not
restrict modification of the portions of the Library
contained in the Combined Work and reverse engineering for debugging such modifications, if you
also do each of the following:
* a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the
Combined Work that the Library is used in it and
that the Library and its use are covered by this License. * b) Accompany the Combined Work with a
copy of the GNU GPL and this license document. *
c) For a Combined Work that displays copyright notices during execution, include the copyright notice
for the Library among these notices, as well as a reference directing the user to the copies of the GNU
GPL and this license document. * d) Do one of the
following: o 0) Convey the Minimal Corresponding
Source under the terms of this License, and the Corresponding Application Code in a form suitable for,
and under terms that permit, the user to recombine
or relink the Application with a modified version
of the Linked Version to produce a modified Combined Work, in the manner specified by section 6 of
the GNU GPL for conveying Corresponding Source.
o 1) Use a suitable shared library mechanism for
linking with the Library. A suitable mechanism
is one that (a) uses at run time a copy of the Library already present on the user’s computer system, and (b) will operate properly with a modified
version of the Library that is interface-compatible
with the Linked Version. * e) Provide Installation
Information, but only if you would otherwise be required to provide such information under section 6
of the GNU GPL, and only to the extent that such
information is necessary to install and execute a
modified version of the Combined Work produced
by recombining or relinking the Application with
a modified version of the Linked Version. (If you
use option 4d0, the Installation Information must
accompany the Minimal Corresponding Source and
Corresponding Application Code. If you use option
4d1, you must provide the Installation Information
in the manner specified by section 6 of the GNU
GPL for conveying Corresponding Source.)

5. Combined Libraries.
You may place library facilities that are a work
based on the Library side by side in a single library
together with other library facilities that are not
Applications and are not covered by this License,
and convey such a combined library under terms of
your choice, if you do both of the following:
* a) Accompany the combined library with a copy
of the same work based on the Library, uncombined
with any other library facilities, conveyed under
the terms of this License. * b) Give prominent notice with the combined library that part of it is a
work based on the Library, and explaining where
to find the accompanying uncombined form of the
same work.
6. Revised Versions of the GNU Lesser General
Public License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised
and/or new versions of the GNU Lesser General
Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version,
but may differ in detail to address new problems or
concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Library as you received it specifies that
a certain numbered version of the GNU Lesser General Public License “or any later version” applies to
it, you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that published version or of any
later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Library as you received it does not
specify a version number of the GNU Lesser General Public License, you may choose any version of
the GNU Lesser General Public License ever published by the Free Software Foundation.
If the Library as you received it specifies that a
proxy can decide whether future versions of the
GNU Lesser General Public License shall apply,
that proxy’s public statement of acceptance of
any version is permanent authorization for you to
choose that version for the Library.

