
INTRODUCTION 


All businesses start as someone’s dream. This book has been written to help make 
your dream of starting your own business a reality. 


With more and more people starting their own businesses each year and with 
technological advances offering unprecedented access to information, talent, 
materials, and products, there has never been a better time to start your own 
business. At the same time, there has also never been more competition. 


Being your own boss can be as challenging as it is rewarding, so equip yourself 
with as much knowledge as possible on the issues you may face and the options 
available before you start. How to Start YourOwn Business aims to provide you 
with a tool kit to help you build a successful enterprise. 


Chapter 1 covers everything you need to know before you start, from coming up 
with your business idea and finding a gap in the market to choosing a business 
structure, model, and strategy. Chapter 2 looks at the steps you need to take to 
start your business, including how to choose a name and develop your brand 
and how to sell online, take payments, and fulfill orders. Chapter 3 shows you 
what you need to do to get going, including planning and building a website, 
sourcing and recruiting staff, and generating interest in your business. Chapter 4 
tells you everything you need to know about how to run your business, including 
how to encourage customer loyalty and build strategic alliances, how to analyze 
performance and finance growth, how to manage a supply chain, and how to 
retain talent and look after your employees in the workplace. Finally, Chapter 5 
shows you how to grow your business, how to manage change, how to retain 
customers and license products, and how to sell your business when it is time 

to move on. 


Making the Big Leap 


If you are thinking about starting your own business, developing your 
idea in your spare time is a good way to start. Then weigh the pros and 
cons to understand your motivation for starting something new. 


Working for yourself or others? As a business owner, you have more responsibilities 
It is crucial not to underestimate the hard work and need to invest more in your future. You will take 
involved in running a business. Instead of more risks and feel more pressure running your own 
having one role, business owners often take business, but the potential for success is often greater 
on multiple responsibilities—from producing a than working for an existing company. Running 
product or performing a service to carrying out your own business will mean you have more 

all the administrative tasks as well as going out and control and flexibility. 

selling the idea. Although you may no longer have Be clear about your 

a boss to answer to, your working hours may motivations for 

be much longer, especially at the start. starting upa 


Considering your options 


Remember that paid employment brings many benefits, whereas 
being your own boss can be stressful and financially risky. Weigh 
your options carefully before you reach a balanced decision. 


ee et 
SSS SSS5 SS=5/S=== 7 


Pros Cons 


> Financial security comes from > Earnings are limited depending 
a regular weekly or monthly THEIR COMPANY on the company’s pay policy. 
paycheck. > Your hard work helps achieve 


> Sickness and vacation pay bring another person's dreams rather 
more consistent income. than your own. 

> Sense of belonging comes from 
working with others toward a 
common cause. 


> Office politics can be frustrating. 


> Time and money is spent on 
commuting to a workplace 
chosen by the company. 

> Lack of flexibility in work 
hours and conditions can 
be problematic. 


> Investment in your development 
and training is paid for by employers. 
> Opportunities to build e 
experience and develop 
new skills are available. 


BEFORE YOU START 


12/13 


Making the Big Leap 


business. Perhaps you want to run 
a business from home doing what 
you love. Maybe you are driven by 
wanting to make a positive impact 
on society. Think about how you 
see your business in the future. You 
might want to grow your company 
and employ staff, building a family 
firm for future generations. Or 
perhaps you want to make enough 
money to sell and move on. Maybe 
you want to generate wealth to 
buy your dream home or travel. 

Or you may simply want enough 
income to replace what you 
earned as an employee. 


Pros 


> Potential for higher earnings, 
without the limits put in place by 
an employer. 

> Greater control, independence, 


and flexibility to work around 
family/personal commitments. 


> Ability to choose your hours 
and work at your own pace. 

> Potential for greater job 
satisfaction—all your efforts go 
toward achieving your goals. 

> Opportunity to pursue 
your dream. 


Rather than give up your paid 
employment right away, you 

may want to start your new 
business venture in your spare 
time. A start-up that begins in this 
way is known as a “side hustle.” 


You keep the benefits of being 
employed, while testing the 
viability of a new business. It is a 
compromise, but it can also be 
a springboard, allowing you to 
develop your business idea with 
less personal and financial risk. 


MY COMPANY 


regret t 


Jeff Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon 


Cons 

> Greater financial risk with less 
security as a business owner. 

> Sense of isolation from 
working independently with 
less human interaction. 


> Responsiblity for mistakes and 
failures, as well as successes, rests 
with you. 

> Potential strain on family/social 
life from working long hours. 

> No income if sick or on vacation. 

> Inability to switch off at the 
end of the working day. 


When contemplating starting your own business, it is wise to do some 
self-assessment first. Take time to weigh your strengths and weaknesses 
and consider whether you are ready to be your own boss. 


Why you? 

Starting your own business is 

an exciting opportunity, but it is 
essential to be practical from the 
beginning. Before making any 
decisions, ask yourself some key 
questions. First and foremost, do 
you have a realistic business idea, 
and do you have the drive and 
energy to bring it to fruition? Also, 
do you have the necessary skills 
to develop your idea, and if not, 
could you acquire them? If the 
answer to these questions is no, 
that does not mean you will never 
start your own business, just not 
the one you are thinking of now. 


Assessing yourself 
Being your own boss requires 
a wide range of abilities, many 
of which you will need at the 
outset. Take time to identify the 
transferable skills you know you 
have—plus other talents you could 
develop—that would be useful for 
the business. Also consider the 
skills friends and family may be 
able to offer you. Conversely, 
scrutinize yourself, looking for 
areas of weakness, and think of 
ways you can overcome them. 
Running a business is a long- 
term commitment, so working ina 
field that interests you is important. 
However, you need to be confident 
that your interest is strong enough 
to last the duration of the business. 


6000006. 


Your strengths 


Think about all the personal 
strengths you can bring to the 
business, including: 


> Professional skills, such as 
managing people, creating 
budgets, negotiating, and 
dealing with clients. 


» Academic abilities may 
include numeracy, language 
skills, and artistic abilities. 

> Personal characteristics, 

such as energy, determination, 

curiosity, and creativity. 


eeecoeseoeee 
eeceeaseoce 


mvrorrwnynow? 14/15 De 


“The only way to do great work 
is to love what you do.” 


Steve Jobs, cofounder Apple Inc., 2005 


Your weaknesses Your interests 


Identify aspects about yourself Think about what interests 
that could hinder the business. | you and how you might 


These might include: incorporate this into 

> Inexperience, in areas such your business. 
as setting up IT systems, hiring What do you enjoy doing in 
staff, and managing accounts. your spare time? 

> Lack of knowledge in areas =} Whatsort of people do you 
such as using social media and like spending time with, other 
software packages. than your family? 

> Personal traits can includea Have you gained particular 
lack of confidence, skills and knowledge through 
disorganization, and your interests and hobbies? 


impulsiveness. > Whatissues are you most 


> Personal circumstances, passionate about? 
such as the need to care for 
children or living in a remote 

location. 


peeeceeoseseeeseeeseoesereseeeeese 


eeeeceoeeeseeseeeece 


pOoeeeeeeseoseeeseeeooseseoeeeseses eoeeceeoseseeseesece 


Why now? 
Timing is essential in business, 
and offering the right product at 
the right time can set you on the 
path to success. As such, spend 
time researching your potential 
market (see pp.20—21), look at 
what rivals are doing, and seek 
professional advice. The timing 
also has to be right for you, of 
course, but are you ready? 
Starting a business requires 
time and money and also involves 
pressure and risk, which you need 
to be prepared for. Unless you are 
fully confident, look for ways to 
start selling slowly and gauge 
demand. If you are currently 
employed, consider starting the 
business in your spare time as a 
side hustle (see p.13), perhaps 
reducing your employed hours 
as the business grows. 


iv NEED TO KNOW 


> Hard skills are formally acquired 
indicators of ability, such as a 
qualification or certificate. 


> Soft skills are personal abilities 
that have developed naturally, 
such as creative thinking and 
problem-solving. 

> Transferable skills are the 
capabilities and areas of expertise 
that can be easily transferred from 
one role to another. Examples 
include time management, 
communication, and leadership. 


Coming Up 
with Your Idea 


Every business begins with an idea, whether to solve a problem 
or improve an existing product or service. It is an exciting first 
step, although you must also ensure that your idea is viable. 


Finding a good idea 
A business idea does not have 
to be new, but it must satisfy a 
need in order to succeed. Start 
by thinking about problems you 
have encountered yourself, such 
as not being able to buy a certain 
product or access a useful service. 
This may be a gap in the market 
(see pp.20—21) that you could 
fill. Alternatively, where products 
and services are available—but 
are unsatisfactory—this could be 
an opportunity for you to improve 
them and offer something better. 
When looking for a good idea, 
consider what existing businesses 
currently offer and what they 
do not—which could pose an 
opportunity. Also look out for 
niche or specialty markets, where 
you could meet the demands of a 
small but dedicated group of 
customers (see pp.38-39). 


Researching markets 
Markets are made up of people 
with common demands, so 
learning what interests and 
concerns them is valuable 
information. Pay close attention to 
the media, especially online, and 
look out for growing trends that 
you could tap into. Depending on 
the market that interests you, 
joining relevant internet forums 
can give you a useful insight into 
members’ needs, desires, and 


problems. Ask questions and 
seek opinions, and discuss your 
idea with the people who may 
become your customers one day. 

Another source of useful 
information are online trade 
journals, which most industries 
publish. Here, you can learn about 
developments, trends, and how 
well potential rivals are performing 
and gain essential knowledge that 
can help shape your ideas. 


Will your idea work? 

In order for your idea to succeed, it 
needs to be achievable and viable. 
Scrutinize it from all angles and 
question every aspect of it, as well 
as your ability to make it happen. 
Consider how it might be affected 
by market changes. Identify its 
strengths and how you could build 
on them, while also resolving any 
weaknesses. Also, try to predict 
any threats and how you might 
overcome them, while making the 
most of any new opportunities. 


i CASE STUDY 


Honest Tea 


Seth Goldman first had the idea 

for a low-calorie beverage while 
working on a case study of the 
drinks industry at Yale, noting there 
were sugary drinks and bottled 
water on the market, but nothing in 
between. After a run in New York’s 
Central Park, he could not find a 
suitable drink to buy. Goldman 

saw a problem and came up with 

a solution: in 1998 he co-founded 
Honest Tea, making organic, 
not-too-sweet, bottled teas, 

which became a market leader. 


Using a checklist 

A “good idea checklist” is a widely 
used tool to help assess the merits 
of a new business idea. Good ideas 
usually meet most of these criteria 
(see right). Once you have your idea, 
be sure to keep it safe (see pp.96-97). 


g 


E 
c Mm 
Dy 
that jg “pp 
IS ed 
2, Inn Not cis Marke 2 
The , Vat, Enth Y Off 
© idea @s Y ava ilab ie ring 4 ‘se 
A 


Mang os Pang; FALV 


BEFORE YOU START {| 5 / {| fi yy) 
Coming Up with Your Idea 


duct 


WAV Vee LV: 


a FAI al AY S UTTER 
Apert sican outside the 


Vice re 
s aval be box Ai 


embrace 
opportunities 


Lakshmi Mittal, CEO ArcelorMittal 


Offering Products 
or Services 


Most businesses typically sell either products or services to their 
customers. When starting up your business, deciding what you 
will offer is essential, and there are many factors to consider. 


Considering the options any profit is made, which may also _ typically expect to be invoiced for 
An important consideration when take time. When the goods are sold, certain services, which can mean 
deciding between creating a however, they are usually paid for waiting several weeks to be paid. 
product- or service-based business immediately by the customer. Some businesses offer products 
is the time and costs involved—and In contrast, services can be and services. A motor mechanic, for 
how soon it will generate income. offered immediately and with example, might repair and sell cars, 
With a product-based business, it minimal setup costs, if it is you enjoying the benefits of both types 
takes time to source or create then providing them yourself. However, of businesses. However, when 

test the goods being sold. The if you require training or need starting out for the first time, it is 
goods then need to sellin sufficient specific equipment, this will take advisable to concentrate on one 
numbers to cover their cost before time and money. Also, customers type first before trying the other. 


Selling products and services 


Selli d In addition to the differing amounts of time and money 
elling products required to set up a business selling products or services, 
» Customers can see what you should also consider longer term factors. 
they are buying, helping 
them decide to make a 
purchase or not. 
> Stock needs to be 
replenished, which is an 
ongoing cost. It may also 


Lr 
~~ 


be perishable so will mean 
a direct loss to the business eo o” 
if it is not sold. S 
> Products need to be stored, = q 
es | PO5'SAUTO 
which may be costly. CENTER 
QUALITY USED 
CARS FOR SALE 
& 
SERVICING 


Scalability refers to the ability 
of the business to increase sales 
without costs rising in proportion. 
It is an area where product- and 
service-based businesses differ. 


> Certain products can be highly 
scalable. For example, once 
created, online courses, apps, or 
software, can be sold in unlimited 
numbers with little further cost. 


> All services take time to deliver, 
which makes them less scalable, 
especially if more people need 
to be recruited to deliver them, 
raising costs. However, extra 
services can be added to the 
offering, giving scope for growth. 


BEFORE YOU START 
Offering Products or Services 


O BE AWARE 


> Avoid running out of stock, 
which will frustrate customers 


“Quality in 
and might encourage them to s 7 
shop with your competitors. a service Or 


> Do not expect a good product or p rod uct j 


service to sell itself. The business 
must be set up to distribute and al 
sell the product effectively. i 


» Regularly compare your 
prices, products, and the quality 
of your services against those of 
your competitors. 


> Make sure the products and 
services you offer are fully 
compliant with all regulations. 
Check regularly. 


| 


| 


ul 


f 
ll | 


into it. It 


Peter Drucker, US management consultant 


Offering a service 


> Services are intangible, 
so the customer must trust 
that the provider will deliver 
a good service (see pp.70-71). 


> Few services are unique, so 
competition can be fierce, which 
means it is vital to maintain a 
good reputation with customers. 


> A dissatisfied customer may 
refuse to pay after the service 
has been given. 


> Depending on the 
service, you may need 
to undertake regular 
training or acquire 

certification. 


Finding a Gap 
in the Market 


For your business to succeed there must be a market—or potential to create 
one—for what you plan to offer. This means either selling something entirely 
new that people will want or providing a better alternative to what is available. 


Identifying gaps 

A gap in the market is simply a need that is not 
currently met. This is either because the product or 
service to meet that need does not yet exist, because 
existing businesses fail to meet it adequately, or 
because the need has not yet been identified. For 
example, while a town may have several restaurants, it 
may lack one serving Mexican cuisine, which is a need 
you could address. Alternatively, the town may have a 
French restaurant that fails to meet customer needs by 
not catering for children, which is also a potential gap. 


Finally, while the town’s residents may feel content 
with the existing restaurants, they may still eagerly 
adopt a completely new alternative approach that 
meets a need they did not know they had. For instance, 
a food delivery service that allows them to order 
any cuisine, at any time, to enjoy at home. 

In order to find a gap, research the market you 
are planning to enter, and think about your own 
experiences (see pp.16—17). Look for products and 
services that are not currently available, which you 
could offer. Also look at those that are available to 


Filling the gap 


A gap in the market is a chance to reach an untapped 
group of customers. A portion of an existing market may 
be underserved or a new opportunity may appear within 
an existing industry. By studying trends and what 
competitors offer, you can assess whether your product 
could fulfil customer needs that are not currently met. 


iL 
YOUR NEW OFFERING 
> Catchy new look 


>» Medium price 
> High-quality, durable product 
> Stylish, all-age appeal; value for 


see if you could provide something better—that 
customers would value more highly. If you are 
planning to open a local business, speak to people 
about what is available nearby, and what is not. Also 
try out existing products and services yourself to learn 
what you could improve upon. Think laterally and look 
for needs that others have not yet identified. 


Assessing your options 
When considering potential gaps, research why they 
might exist. While it may be that no one has thought 
of a suitable product or service yet, it could also be 
because there is insufficient demand to justify filling 
it (see pp.42—43). For example, the town without a 
Mexican restaurant may once have had one that 
closed through lack of demand. 

Be flexible when looking for your potential market, 
and willing to adapt your ideas. Research your options 
thoroughly before committing yourself. 


BEFORE YOU START ? 0 / ? 1 ))) 
Finding a Gap in the Market 


i NEED TO KNOW 


> Competitive markets are those in which there is a 
large number of buyers and sellers, meaning no one 
can control the market price. 


) Demand refers to the amount of a product or service 
that customers and clients will buy at a given price. 


> Market disrupters create new products, services, 
or approaches that transform existing markets, and 
often become a new market leader in the process. 


Ce eeccosecccccscconecesececeseeesoeseseseosseenesessoeneceD 


“High expectations are 
the key to everything.” 


Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. 


Standing Out 
from the Crowd 


In a crowded marketplace, your business needs to stand out amongst 
rivals in order to attract customers and clients. This involves building 


and maintaining a unique competitive advantage. 


Creating advantage 

When starting a business, you need 
to quickly identify what will make 
your product or service stand out, 


giving you a competitive advantage. 


Gaining and sustaining this 
advantage by offering greater value 
or better benefits than competitors 
is especially crucial when you first 
enter a crowded market. 

You can create this greater value 
in several ways. You can offer a 
product or service that is unique or 
new, one of higher quality or with 
superior customer service, or give 
guarantees. These are your unique 
selling points (USPs). Whichever 
you choose, it is important to make 
sure that customers perceive their 
value, as these are what gives you 
a competitive advantage. 

Providing better benefits than 
the competition (a differentiation 
advantage) or offering the same 


learn 


benefits at a competitive price 
(a cost advantage) are possibilities, 
but beware of making price your 
USP. Low prices can be interpreted 
as low quality, and since you can 
be undercut by rivals, you will not 
attract a loyal customer base. 
Identifying your customers 
and understanding their needs 
(see pp.40—41) is central to building 
a competitive advantage. However, 
to retain their custom, you will 
need to pay attention to what is 
happening in the marketplace, and 
constantly monitor what existing 
and new competitors are offering. 
The value your business offers to 
its customers must be commercially 
viable. There would be no point in 
increasing business costs in order 
to attract customers if your profits 
become minimal. It is crucial to 
strike the right balance between 
the value offered and profit. 


never copy. 


Copy and you die. 


Jack Ma, co-founder of Alibaba.com, 2007 


What sets you apart 


Promoting what makes your business 
better than the competition tells 
potential customers why they should 
choose you, and will help to attract 
your target market. This uniqueness 
should form part of your “value 
proposition’—the promise you make 
to customers about the qualities and 
benefits they can expect from you 
and your business. 


LEELA LE 


Pree 


Go above 
and beyond 
In order to attract and 
retain customers, your 
business must offer value 
and benefits they cannot 
get elsewhere. These are 
your unique selling 
points (USPs) 


CREATING USPs 


How to differentiate your product or 
service will depend on what you are 
offering, the market, and your competition. 


> Offer products that provide something 
different from those of rivals, for example, 
better quality, safer, or unique designs. 


> Provide services that customers cannot 
find anywhere else or that are distinctive 
and more appealing. 


> Attractive prices can set a business apart 
from competitors, but quality cannot be 
ignored. Customers assess both when 
deciding if something is value for money. 


Simangourfominecons 22/23 Dl 


eo MAKING IT WORK 


> Constantly learn about your 
customers to ensure you meet 
their needs, which can change 
over time. 

> Review your USPs regularly to 
ensure they are unique and are 
valued by your customers. 

> Regularly assess your rival's USPs 
and find ways to ensure that yours 
surpass theirs. 

>» Monitor the costs and benefits 
of your USPs to the business to 
ensure profit margins are healthy. 

> Keep watching for new market 
entrants and what they offer. 


LEE JET 


Defining Your Goals 


One of the first steps in starting a business is to define what you want to 
do and why you want to do it. This will help you focus your ideas more 
clearly and allow you to start making specific plans. 


Defining your purpose 
When starting a business, first 
decide what you want to achieve. 
Known as your business “vision,” 
this is a long-term view of what 
your business will become. To 
then help make that vision become 
a reality, identify why you want to 
start this business and not another. 
For example, you may want to open 
a travel agency, but why? It may be 


because you want to offer exciting 
trips, to serve a particular market, 
or because you simply see itas a 
way to make money. This is the 
“purpose” behind your business 
vision. Use this to inform your 
decisions and to focus your plans. 
For instance, an agency offering 
unique vacations would be planned 
differently from one aimed at only 
making money. Your vision and 


purpose embody your business, 
which you can use when deciding 
your strategies and planning your 
working procedures and practices. 
Share them with other people 
involved in your business from 
the start, including investors, 
customers, clients, and staff by 
encapsulating them in a “mission 
statement” (see right) that sums 
up you and your business. 


Setting out your values 


While deciding the vision and purpose of your business, 
also consider the values you want to uphold, such as 
honesty, integrity, value for money, and passion. These 
provide a map and compass to guide your decision-making 
and should be reflected in how the business operates. 
Incorporate these values throughout the business, and 
communicate them with others so that everyone dealing 
with you knows what you stand for. For example, a 

travel agency catering to older travelers may choose 
“commitment, quality, adventure, and luxury” as 


its business values. 


what you do; 


why you did it. 


Simon Sinek, author and motivational speaker, 2009 


"etningvourcoas 24/20 DI 


Creating a mission statement 


A mission statement is a written declaration that clarifies the purpose of 
your business—what it does, who it does it for, and how it does it. It should 
be concise and give clear answers to three key questions: 


What? Define the products or services that your business provides. 
Who for? Say who your products or services are designed for. 
How? Explain how your customers’ aspirations will be met. 


To support your mission statement, you can also write a vision statement, 
outlining where the business aspires to be in the future, having achieved its 
mission. You can also write a values statement, explaining the values your 
business will maintain in pursuit of its mission. Together, the three statements 
form a pledge between your business and those who deal with it. 


o @ 
i CASE STUDY 
Microsoft Your mission statement (see above) not only provides 


focus for you, but it also serves as inspiration for others. 
It can be used to help attract and motivate staff, giving 
them a clear set of values to follow and a keen sense 

of what the business does and why. It can also be an 
important marketing tool, projecting a precise image 


In 1975, Bill Gates founded the software company 
Microsoft. Its initial vision was simple but ambitious: 
“to put a computer on every desk and in every home.” 
The company aligned its strategy, communications, 
and culture to make that vision a reality. Since then, 
computers have become commonplace, and so the 
company has a new vision: “to empower every person 
and every organization on the planet to achieve more.” 


of your business's unique identity—its brand—to the 
outside world, helping attract customers and clients. 
However, it is essential to demonstrate the values you 
portray, as failure to do so can undermine the message. 


Choosing a Structure 


You may be starting out on your own, with family, or with a business partner. 
There are other options, too. The structure can change as the business grows, 
but begin with a form that is a good fit for where you are now. 


Considering your options 

The business structure you choose depends on the 
nature of your business (its complexity and growth 
potential) and the level of risk you are willing to take. 
Your choice will be influenced by whether you 

are starting out alone, or with one or more business 


Most people start out as a sole proprietor or in an 
informal partnership and are responsible for all 
business debts. As the business grows, it may 
eventually become necessary to register it legally 

(see pp.212-215) as a limited liability company. This 
protects your personal assets from any business debts 


partners, and by the purpose of your venture—whether 
ethical or charitable as opposed to financial. 


and also enables you, and your business partner, to 
more easily secure loans and other finance. 


Tends to work for one client at a time for the duration of 
a contract; can operate as a limited company. 


Run by the owner under a business name; larger 
businesses may need to register as limited companies. 


> Setup is simple 

> Profits can be 
retained after tax 

> Capital required 
is minimal 

» No annual business 
accounts to file, only 
a personal income 
tax return 


> Debt liability unlimited: 
no distinction between 
your business and 
private assets 


> Capacity to raise 
additional capital is low 

> Decision-making rests 
on your shoulders 


Self-employed sole proprietor who typically works on 
multiple projects for more than one client. 


> Start up costs are 
minimal, with the ability 
to work anywhere— 
including from home 


> Workload and schedule 
chosen by you 


> Flexibility around your 
working hours 


» Work can be sporadic, 
causing cash flow issues 

> Sense of isolation if 
you work alone 


> Financial management is 
your responsibility alone 


> Work-life balance may 
be difficult to achieve 


> Security of income from 
long-term contracts 

> Control over which 
contracts to accept and 
when to take a break 

> Pay is typically ata 
lucrative “day rate” 


> Contracts can end 
without warning, 
depending on terms 

>» Working hours may 
be long and away 
from home 

> Time required to 
establish credibility 


Enterprise where two or more people share the 
ownership, control, and profits of the business. 


> Partners bring their 
expertise, knowledge, 
and contacts to the 
business, along with 
their capital and 
other resources 


>» No need to file any 
annual accounts 


> Issues can arise if one 
partner leaves or feels 
they are doing more than 
their pre-agreed fair 
share of the workload 

> Partners expected to 
pay tax on their own 
portion of profit 


BEFORE YOU START 
Choosing a Structure 


26/27 I” 


If you have the funds, buying an existing business that 
is already operating may be a tempting option, since it 
removes the need to start from scratch. However, there 
are many reasons businesses are sold, including poor 


performance, so research the business thoroughly to find 


out why it is on the market. Seek professional advice, 
review the financial records, check online reviews, and 
ask around locally. Be aware that buying a business 
involves up-front investment, which will be at risk until 


the venture proves successful. 


Commercial entity owned and run by members of the 
same family, often across multiple generations. 


> Stability and continuity 
in the long term 

> Trust, loyalty, and 
understanding 

> Commitment and 
values shared 

> Profits remain within 
the wider family 


>» Nepotism—a preference 
for hiring family 
members, even if they 
lack skills or experience 

> Potential for conflict, 
and conflicts that arise 
may be more difficult 
to resolve 


Independent branch of another business; franchisee 
pays a fee for the right to represent the parent business. 


>» No need to develop an 
original business idea 

> Franchisor gives training, 
support, and knowledge 

> Risk is low, as business 
model is already proven 

>» Amount of capital 
required is minimal 


> The business must still 
answer to the franchisor 
> Creative control lacking 
in brand, training, 
or culture 
> Franchisor could go bust 
> Payments to the 
franchisor are ongoing 


50% 


of all small businesses 
are operated from home 


Smallbizgenius.net, 2019 


Legally registered business, whose assets and debts 
belong to the company itself, not the owners. 


> Risk is lower because 
the owner(s) are not 
personally liable for 
business debts 

> Ability to go public to 
attract inward investment 
if rapid, high growth 
is anticipated 


> Owners invest their own 
money and assume legal 
responsibility 

>» Company distributes part 
of profit to shareholders 

> Corporation tax and 
tax return must be filed 
and paid annually 


Cooperative, social enterprise, or charity that is 
committed to a cause rather than to making a profit. 


> Profits can be reinvested 
into beneficial causes 

> Eligibility for grants 
and tax exemptions 

> Opportunity to 
“make a difference” 

» Organization is 
self-governing 


> Profits cannot be 
dispersed—personal 
financial reward may 
be lower 

> Competition for funding, 
making finance uncertain 

> Reliance on the public's 
generosity and empathy 
for donations 


Starting a 
Family Business 


Creating a family business is an opportunity to work with those you 
most trust and care about. It can be very successful as long as it is 
set up and run correctly—as a professional business. 


Working together 
Creating a family business can be highly rewarding, 
and it offers many advantages, such as a shared desire 
to succeed and the benefit of mutual support. However, 
there are also disadvantages. Where most roles are 
performed by family members, the business can lack 
the breadth of skills and experience found in more 
diverse companies. Also, family relationships are not 
the same as working ones, which can result in conflicts 
that could harm the business (see pp.54—55). 

To help ensure the business succeeds, it is essential 
to make some early decisions, such as who owns it, 
how it will be financed, and how profits and liabilities 
will be shared. You also need to decide the roles of 
everyone involved, when and how they work, and how 
they will be rewarded. To do this, draw up a written 
family charter together (see right) so that everyone 
knows what to expect from the business. 


Is it right for you? 


Setting up a family business is not 
always straightforward. Before you 
take the plunge, you—and everyone 
involved—need to weigh the pros and 
cons to decide objectively whether this 
is the right choice. A new business 


PROS 


> Familiarity Knowing each 
other well, you communicate 
easily and effectively. 


> Strong commitment You 
all share common goals. 


requires full commitment and a mutual » Speed You can launch your 
determination to make things succeed. business quickly and cheaply, 
Families working together can be a with minimal need to recruit. 
potent force. However, if there are any > Support As you understand 
areas of conflict, these will need to be each other's personal and 
settled at an early stage to prevent financial issues, you can 


them from jeopardizing future success. accommodate different needs. 


E OU START 
Starting a Family Business Z 8 Fi Z. 9 ))) 


90% of American 
businesses family owned Establishing clear roles and 


responsibilities is particularly 
control led ° important in family-run businesses. 
Conflict can lead to long-term 
divisions. To avoid this, create an 
informal agreement or charter. 


www.inc.com/encyclopedia/family-owned-businesses.html 


All family members involved will 
need to decide what the charter 
should cover. Such documents 
typically outline how the company 
will be run, its short- and long-term 
objectives, areas of accountability 
and authority, and, sometimes, 
how it might be passed on to the 
next generation. You may need 
to consult a lawyer or business 
mentor to help you agree on tricky 
issues, such as sharing control 
and potential wealth. 


FAMILY FRUIT STALL 


A business charter is not legally 
binding. Once you have started 
selling, it will need to be reviewed 
regularly to ensure it remains 
relevant to the business. 


CONS 


> Familiarity Knowing 
each other well can lead to 
unprofessional attitudes. 


> Narrow thinking A family 
workforce may not be open to 
helpful, external ideas. 


> Personal resentments These 
can affect the business and 
damage family relationships. 
> Assumptions If there is no 


charter, senior family members 
may assume they are in charge. 


Setting Up 
a Franchise 


If you want to start off with a ready-made business model and a 
recognizable brand, you might consider taking on a franchise. Careful 
research, thorough planning, and available funds are all essential. 


Understanding franchises 
A franchise is an agreement that 
authorizes you to start a business 
selling the products or services of 
an established brand. You become 
the franchisee; the established 
company is the franchisor. Not 
all arrangements are the same, 
but they always involve the 
franchisee paying an initial fee 
and a percentage on sales (called 
a royalty) in return for the right to 
sell a branded product or service. 
Fast-food chains—for example, 
McDonald’s—are examples of the 
most common type of franchise, 
a “business format franchise.” In 
these cases, franchisees pay for 


the right to establish independent 
outlets under the franchisor’s brand. 
New outlets will have the same 
design, menu, and operating 
systems as all other franchised 
outlets across a particular region. 


Weighing the costs 

There are some clear advantages 
to this type of business. You can 
benefit from a brand with a loyal 
customer base, a market-tested 
product or service, and established 
logistics. In return for this, you will 
be expected to make a substantial 
initial investment and accept that 
you will be tied to the brand’s 
offerings and infrastructure. 


There are three main types of franchises, each with a different level of rights 
and varying business models. All involve a firm financial commitment. 


Business format 


As a franchisee, you 
get not only the right 
to sell an established 


brand but also a full 
business system to 
follow and a support 
network. This type of 
franchise is used in 


mass-consumer areas, 
such as hair salons and 
in car repair, plumbing, 
and cleaning services. 


Product 


The franchisor grants 
you the right to sell or 
distribute a branded 
product, such as a 
computer or car, using 
the manufacturer's 
trade names, but you 
do not benefit from the 
franchisor’s business 
systems. The products 
you can distribute or 
sell will be restricted. 


Manufacturing 


In return for a fee, 
you acquire the right 
to manufacture a 
product and to use 
associated brand 
names and trademarks. 
The product could, 
for example, bea 
soft drink, with the 
drink flavoring 
ingredients provided 
by the franchisor. 


Becoming a 
franchisee 


Before deciding whether to take ona 
franchise, ask yourself how involved 
you want to be in the day-to-day 
running of the business. If you want 
the franchise to provide you with an 
income but you want to limit the 
hours you work or your involvement 
in the business, then it is important to 
find a franchisor that will permit this. 
Franchisors will have their own 
expectations, so you need to assess 
these and make sure you are willing 
and able to meet them. Careful 
research, negotiation, planning, and 
developing good relations with your 
franchisor are all key to success. 


(FI BE AWARE 


> Start-up costs can be high, 
often significantly higher than if 
you were launching an 
independent business. 


> Your reputation will depend on 
that of the franchisor, so research 
your franchisor thoroughly. Note 
that you will be bound by the 
franchisor’s rules and regulations. 


» Consider your motivations. 
If your driving force is to create 
a business in your image and 
achieve personal goals, then a 
franchise may not be the answer. 


Research possible 
franchisors 


Search for information online, 
but if possible, also attend 
franchise seminars and trade 
shows, where you can meet 
potential franchisors and ask 
questions. Compare types of 
franchise formats and fees. 


1 


~ 


6 a siness 


Z yy Mt 


WLI MLE bay 


soatycontroVegines a: 
SULT AL ESD. nes, si 
cite ies payroll a oy 


i 
teeta 
MULE, 


Ya 


wee 


VA, “hh bf tte 
riers Woe 


Check financing 
and legal issues 


Prepare a business plan and 
cash flow projection. Find the 
most cost-effective financing 
options, possibly through the 
franchisor itself. Seek legal 
advice, and read the fine 
print before signing anything. 


Oe) 


Get up and 
running 


You will usually need to 
report to the franchisor and 
pay royalties on a monthly 
basis. Do this in a timely 
fashion to secure the 
ongoing support of the 
franchisor. Be prepared for 
quality control inspections. 


BEFORE YOU START 
Setting Up a Franchise 


SUF 31 


Match your skills 


Consider how 
compatible you are with 
potential franchisors. What 
can you offer them, and what 
will you get in return in terms 
of business know-how and 
talent development? 


Negotiate 


Choose a location, 
and discuss the potential for 
being the only franchisee in 
the locality. Talk about what 
you will get and what is 
expected of you. Agree on 
product pricing and the 
percentage royalty on 
revenue you will pay. 


Alternative Types 
of Businesses 


Your new business can be more than simply a money-making venture. 
By adopting a less conventional structure, your start-up can gather support 
to help those in need or fund causes and projects that you care about. 


Looking at your options 
If you are starting your business 
in order to pursue specific social, 
charitable, or other objectives, a 


type might not suit your needs. 
Other business types include 


charities (see below). Enterprises 


under the catch-all description of 


Find the right fit for your business 


A cooperative belongs to its members and is controlled and run by and 
for them. Since it is not owned by shareholders, all monies stay within 
the cooperative, to be used as members decide. Clearly, if you wish to 
set one up, you will need to find like-minded individuals and 

be happy with democratic decision-making. 

A social enterprise might appeal if you seek more control but want 
to combine commercial activity with “doing good.” Social enterprises 
buy and sell on the open market but aim to create employment and 
reinvest profits in the business and local or wider community. 

If supporting a cause close to your heart is your prime business 
objective, a charity may be the best option, but strict laws govern how 
charities operate; these vary between countries and sometimes states. 


wages and salaries paid 
in the US 
nonprofit sector 


Krisztina Tury, learningtogive.org, 2013 


nonprofit organizations, but this is 
a little misleading, since many do 
attempt to make money. The key 
difference is that instead of giving 
conventional commercial business out profits to shareholders or 
withdrawing them yourself, you put 
the money back into the business 
cooperatives, social enterprises, or to keep it running and to fund any 
charitable or social cause that it 
like this are often grouped together supports. If you follow this route, 
earning profit for profit’s sake will 


not be your focus. Rather, the 
business will be run for the benefit 
of its members, a community, social, 
or environmental cause, or to fund 
charitable activities 

Nonprofit organizations are 
self-governing entities. If you set 
one up, you will be a founder 
rather than an owner (although 
cooperatives, by definition, will 
have multiple founders). Being a 


Va SSSSASSSLSSSSSSSSSSSS,, 
Cooperatives 


Cooperatives can 

take many forms, 

including farm, 
retail, or housing, and can also 
be banking providers (such as 
credit unions) and workshops. 


The business would be 
jointly and equally owned 
by you and the rest of the 
members, with business 
decisions made collectively. 


> Goal You must have a clear 
economic, social, or cultural 
objective that the business's 
revenue helps fund. 

> Membership This will tend 
to be open and voluntary, 
with each member having one 
vote on business decisions. 

) Profits Surplus profits can be 
given to members who have a 
financial stake in the business. 


SILJLLLLLL LA LLL Lhd 


MOONS 
| 


BEFORE YOU START 
Alternative Types of Businesses 


32/33 IE 


founder means that you cannot 
profit directly from the net earnings 
of the business, although you will 
be entitled to a salary for your work. 
While the business's income can 
come from selling goods or services, 
you may also be able to fund-raise 
via donations, sponsorships, and 
grants. Some nonprofit enterprises, 
especially charities, may also be 
able to apply for tax benefits. 
Businesses that profess to have 
ethical dimensions are likely to face 
scrutiny from both the public and 
official bodies, so you will need 
a clear mission statement (see 
pp.24—25). You must be transparent 
and accountable, exercise good 
governance, and keep accurate 


a ee 
Vv) Social enterprises 


profits earned by trading. 


» Mission Whether social or 
environmental, your mission 
must be clearly set out in your 
governing documents. 


> Independence Your business is 
independently owned. 


» Income Your business earns 
the majority of its income 
through trading—or is clearly 
working toward this aim. 


SOX NAGS SGN OS SACS SCN 


~ 


records. You will also need to 
develop excellent PR (public 
relations) to help sustain funding. 


Different... but similar 
Although its focus is different, a 
nonprofit organization will often 
use similar business strategies and 
management techniques as those 
found in “for-profit” businesses. 
Even those that rely heavily on 
volunteers will usually need to hire 
some paid staff and employ similar 
promotional techniques to those 
used by commercial enterprises. 
Like them, the aim of your business 
is still to make money, but your 
objective is to channel it into your 
chosen charitable or social cause. 


If you set up a social enterprise, your main aim will be to 

promote social change. This could involve tackling social 

problems, improving people's life chances, providing y 
training and employment opportunities, supporting communities, and y 
helping protect the environment. Your business will do this using the 


Examples of social enterprises could include a magazine whose profits 
go to help the homeless, a café that provides work opportunities for 
the long-term unemployed, a business promoting recycling, or a 
gardening service that improves green spaces in the neighborhood. 


Although the exact definition differs between countries, here are 
some key aspects likely to mark your business as a social enterprise: 


> Operation Your business is 


run entirely in the interests 


of your social mission. | 
y 


> Profits You reinvest or give 


away the majority of your 
profits or surpluses to support 
your mission. 


> Transparency You are 


open about how the business JZ 
operates and the impact it has. y) 


LILLILLLLLLLALLLL LLL LLL LLL LA Lh LL LL 


A NEED TO KNOW 


>» Governance is how a governing 
body oversees and manages the 
way an organization functions. 


> Mission statement refers to 
the formal expression of the 
aims and values of a business. 


>» Nonprofit or not-for-profit are 
terms denoting enterprises not 
primarily focused on profit. The 
two are often synonymous but in 
the US are distinct in terms of tax, 
governance, and functions. 

> Social entrepreneurs are people 
who set up businesses in order 
to help solve social problems 
or bring about social change. 


a SUMAN UMMM MEME ly 
Charities 


To be granted 

charity status to 

raise funds for your 
chosen cause, your business will 
have to meet strict criteria. It can 
be set up as a trust, corporation, 
or association, but all resources 
must be geared toward its 
charitable goals. 


> Your cause You will typically 
be required by law to devote a 
specific percentage of income 
to your charitable cause. 


> Remaining funds Anything 
left over can be used to pay 
for administrative costs. 


> Associated ventures Any 
thrift shops and other business 
activities that support your 
charity may have to be part of 
a separate trading business, 
such as a social enterprise. 


SSS SISSON 
NSIS 


N 


SLALLLLLLALL LLL LL LL LL 


Choosing a Model 


One of the first decisions to make when planning a business is how 
it will operate and make money—its business model. Examining 
the choices available will help you decide what will work best. 


Understanding the options brands to those readers. Alternatively, the publisher 
To be successful, all start-ups need a sound way of might give away the magazine for free to increase its 
operating that generates profit. This may involve audience, then charge more for advertising. 

adopting a single business model, such as retail, As you shape your business model, seek the opinions 
or a combination of models. For example, a magazine of potential customers, take expert advice, then trial 


publisher could use a subscription model, charging its the model in a pilot—adapting it as necessary (see 
readers a regular fee, and an advertising modeltoearn  pp.132—133). The following are common examples 
money from companies who want to promote their of business models, but there are many more. 


Customers buy goods directly froma Individual businesses may sell online 
shop or outlet. The retailer makes or from their own websites or on “third- 
buys the products from a wholesaler or distributor party” sites that act as virtual marketplaces and charge 
then adds to (or “marks up”) the price to make a profit a fee. Leading third-party websites include Shopify 
and sells directly to customers, face-to-face. and Etsy (see pp.68-69). 


Businesses with a traditional offline ¥ Manufacturers, such as furniture 
store and an online presence use this. makers, use raw materials to make 


Customers can order online and/or collect and buy products, which they sell to a wholesaler (such as a 
from physical stores. Helps retailers offer a larger dealer or outlet), who sells them on at a marked-up 
range of products than a physical store can hold. price to the customer. 


Wholesalers generally buy products Individuals sell products directly to 
from manufacturers and producers, then customers—either via product parties or 
resell to retailers, who sell to customers. Wholesalers one-to-one sales. Some companies, such as Mary Kay, 
may sell direct to customers, or first to a specific sell products to individual agents, who take a share of 
distributor, who sells on to a general wholesaler. the profits on each item they sell. 


BEFORE YOU START 
Choosing a Model 


34/35 IE 


“Familiarity with different [business] models is key.” 


Abdo Riani, www.forbes.com, 2019 


Big successful companies (franchisors) 
allow private individuals (franchisees) to 

buy the right to trade under their brand, using their 
systems, and sell their products or services. It is a way 
of buying into an established business (see pp.30-31). 


© Some companies attract customers by 


offering a free product or service and 
the option of a paid-for superior version. LinkedIn, for 
instance, offers a free networking platform ora 
paid-for version with advanced features. 


aN 
e Also known as the razor blade model, 


this works by selling a basic durable 
product, such as a printer, at a low price to encourage 
ongoing sales of essential components, such as ink 
cartridges, sold at premium prices. 


Agencies connect buyers with sellers 
and earn a transaction fee from one or 


the other, or both. Users of this model include estate 
agents and financial advisors, who earn a commission 
based on the value of the transaction. 


This model allows companies 
(licensors) to commercialize their 
intellectual property by licensing their designs, 
products, or services to others (licensees) in return 
for a fee, while retaining ownership (see pp.206-207). 


Customers pay a regular fee 
(membership fee) to access content, 
products, or services. Many gyms, dating agencies, 
online classes, and software and media companies, 
such as Netflix and Sky TV, use this model. 


eo) To sell advertising space, a company 


creates entertaining copy, music, video, 
or other content, to attract a large targeted audience 
to a publication or platform, where other businesses 
will then pay to advertise their products. 


(Ss) Most website owners use this model 


to make money. They invite retailers to 
promote their products on the website and receive a 
commission from the retailer when a customer buys 
a promoted product. 


Creating a 
Strategy 


The process of creating a business strategy will help 
you identify what is possible and what is not. It is a 
map setting out your goals and how to reach them. 


Defining your business 
Every new company needs a 
business strategy that is well 
thought out, communicates its 
long-term goals to everyone 
involved, and sets out broadly 
how these aims will be achieved. 
Creating a strategy takes research 
and thought and should include the 
input of others with an interest in 
your business. When complete, you 
can then use it as a guide to help 
decide courses of action. 

Start by clarifying the purpose 
of your business, what it stands 


for, and what you want it to achieve. 


Also consider the nature of your 
business—its target audience and 


(J MAKING IT WORK 


> Astrategy must be kept 
under constant review, since 
the environment in which the 
business operates will change. 


> Check in particular if there 
are impending changes in the 
external environment that will 
have a negative (or positive) 
impact on the business. 


> New legislation, new technology, 
or even changing economic 
forecasts can have a significant 
effect. Keep abreast of current 
affairs and all new developments 
in your field of operation. 


Cee eee eseneseneseeeeeseneesaneneeees 


how it will operate and compete. 
For example, offering a community 
service requires a totally different 
strategy from selling luxury goods. 
Once you fully understand the 
aims and nature of your business 
in more detail, encapsulate this 
in a simple statement that tells 
everyone involved why the 
business exists—its mission 
statement (see pp.24-25). 


Fighting your corner 

A vital aspect of your strategy is 

to take into account the business’s 
strengths and weaknesses, as well 
as the opportunities and threats it 
may face. Conduct a SWOT analysis 
(see p.155) in order to make full use 
of your strengths (S), such as expert 
knowledge, while also addressing 
weaknesses (W), like having 
limited funds. Include ways to 

seek and benefit from new 
opportunities (O) as well as how 

to deal with threats (T). 

Your strategy must include how 
you plan to compete, which for a 
new business is essential. While 
you may not be able to compete 
on price against established rivals, 
there are other approaches, such 
as value, uniqueness, quality, and 
customer service. Deciding the best 
way to compete is central to the 
success of your business. 


COMPETING ON 
PERCEIVED VALUE 


What is worth more? 


As asmall business, we cannot 
compete on price, but can we offer 
greater value to our customers? 
For example: 


> Stay local, which is more 
convenient for customers and 
means the business can offer a 
more personal service. 


> Provide a personalized service, 
where competitors do not, that 
meets customers’ needs better 
and makes them feel special. 

> Offer convenient business hours, 


such as remaining open after 
office hours. 


Evaluating 
your options 


When developing a strategy, every 
aspect must align so that what you 
want your business to achieve is 
something that it realistically can. 
Similarly, the customers you want to 
reach must be those that best meet 
the needs of the business. Take time 
to carefully compare and contrast 
each idea against the overall aims 
of your strategy. For example, when 
considering how to compete, assess 
a range of options before deciding. 


BEFORE YOU START e 6 / Cw ))) 
Creating a Strategy 


COMPETING WITHA COMPETING ON 
UNIQUE OFFERING CUSTOMER SERVICE 


What is not readily available? What do customers really want? 
Can we create a product or service that is hard Can we give customers a level of service 
to find and that competitors cannot easily copy? better than our rivals so they stay loyal? 
For example: For example: 


> Create unique products that cannot be > Provide a personal service and 
found elsewhere, such as custom goods. know our customers by name. 


> Build a website devoted to entirely local > Make buying an enjoyable experience 
needs based on local knowledge. for our customers so they come again. 

> Find a niche that is too small for bigger > Develop a follow-up service to 
companies to be interested in. encourage repeat purchases once a 


> Select additional services that will first purchase has been made. 


appeal to our customers. > Offer flexible terms, such as allowing 
customers to pay by installments or 
offering an extended returns policy. 


yA 
Only O of employees 
today fully understand 


their company’s business 
strategy and what's 
expected of them 


Robert S. Kaplan, American accounting academic 


Knowing Your Market 


When planning a business, you must decide whether to offer products 
and services with broad appeal or to target a niche. You also need to choose 
your market - to sell directly to consumers, to other businesses, or both. 


Mass or niche markets 
Deciding the best market for your 
product or service — your target 
market — is critical to the success 
of any business, and should form 
part of your business strategy 
(see pp.36—37). In broad terms, 
you have two options — mass 
market or niche — though you may 
be able to combine the two. Mass- 
market offerings require a broad 
appeal to attract the widest 
possible customer base, whereas 
niche products should appeal 
directly and specifically to a small 
but dedicated customer base. 
Selling to the mass market can 
produce a high sales volume but 
a relatively low profit. While there 
is greater security in the wider 
market, it is harder and more 
expensive to reach customers 
in that large, disparate group. 


Understanding 
business models 


There are three main ways in which 
businesses trade according to the 
markets they serve. Business-to- 
consumer (B2C) sales are conducted 
directly between a business and 
consumers. Examples include 
traditional retail shops and service 
providers, such as hairdressers and 
plumbers. Business-to-business (B2B) 
is where one business sells directly 
to another. B2B examples include 
manufacturers selling to wholesalers, 
and wholesalers supplying goods and 
equipment to service providers. 


Once you achieve a high sales 
volume, however, your product 
or service becomes cheaper to 
produce, due to economies of scale. 

A niche market may have a low 
sales volume but can generate a 
high profit, if goods or services 
are tailored to a particular 
group willing to pay a 
premium price. There is 
more risk in a niche market, 
but it is easier and cheaper 
to target a smaller, defined 
group of customers. 

Some businesses can 
successfully combine both 
approaches by initially 
launching a specialist 
product or service to a 
niche market, before 
eventually expanding 
their offering to cater 
for the mass market. 


However, the line between 

B2C and B2B can be blurred, 

as some businesses sell to 

other businesses, as well 

as to consumers. Examples 

of this include DIY suppliers 
and food wholesalers. Some 
service providers may also cater 
to both markets as an offshoot 
of their main business. 

The final way in which businesses 
commonly trade is business-to- 
business-to-consumer (B2B2C), 
where companies sell consumer 
goods or services to businesses, 
who then distribute them. Consumers 
recognize the initial business as the 


[CU “> BUSINESS TO 
CONSUMER 


In this model, the business sells products 
and services directly to consumers, who 
are the end users. 


> Examples include retail shops, online 
outlets, market stalls, and service provider, 
such as plumbers, and child minders. 

) B2C sales are governed by customer 
emotions. May be impulsive, often involves 
brand recognition and loyalty. Amount per 
sale generally lower than B2B transactions. 


product or service provider, even 
though they do not buy directly 
from them. The food industry is an 
example: products are marketed to 
consumers, but are sold by food 
manufacturers (B) to wholesalers and 
retailers (B), who sell to consumers (C). 
Similarly, in financial services, one 
company may create a product, then 
partner with major banks or others, 
to sell their product to consumers. 


RS EA__AA SS 


KK uw gow 


BEFORE YOU START 2 Q / 2 e) by) 
Knowing Your Market 


“ "MASS MARKET 


> Large, disparate group, so the product or service 
should have a broad appeal. 

>» High marketing spend to make an impact when 
targeting a wide, general audience, resulting in lower 
profit margins. 

> High sales volume giving economy-of-scale benefits; 
can produce/sell high quantities at a low cost. 


> Asmall and select group with specific wants and needs, 
which the product or service must accurately address. 

> Lower marketing spend for a targeted campaign when 
there are relatively few competitors. 

> Higher profit potential if target customers will pay a 
premium price for a specialized product or service. 

> Low, steady sales volume reduces potential to produce 
benefits of economies of scale. 


60% 


of US businesses 
are B2B 


B2B vs B2C: How Should Your Sales Team 
Be Allocated to Maximize Success?, 
Tomasz Tunguz, 2020 


t= 
yy 


BUSINESS 
TO BUSINESS 


In this model, a business sells its products or 
services directly to another business, which 
is the end user. 


> Examples include companies in a supply 
chain network, where one sells materials 
to another or provides a service, such as 
equipment maintenance or IT support. 


> B2B sales are typically planned and well 
researched, with customers likely to shop 
around before buying. Purchases driven by 
logic. Transactions usually larger than those 
in B2C sales. 


Identifying Your 
Customers 


Understanding who your potential customers are enables you to develop 
products and services to meet their needs. It also allows you to promote 
your business using the most effective means in order to attract sales. 


Targeting customers messages, techniques, and channels that will appeal 

Different people have different needs, interests, and to them. Alternatively, you can also use your own 

desires, which is reflected in the products and services knowledge and experience of a particular segment, 

they buy. As only certain people will be interested in and plan your business accordingly. 

what your business offers, these are the ones to target. One of the most widely used tools to help identify 
Identifying this group, or segment, allows you to your customers is market segmentation. This involves 


develop your products and services to specifically meet breaking the whole market down into four groups with 
their needs and expectations. It willalso enable youto shared characteristics, then to pinpoint potential 
promote your business in a targeted way, using customers within those groups (see below). 


Segmenting the market 


There are several ways to group your customers based on who they are and 
how they behave. One way is to use four broad segments—demographic, 
geographic, psychographic, and behavioral—which relate to how and where 
people live, what they think, and how they behave. These segments can be 
further divided into narrower subgroups. 


xR aS 


GEOGRAPHIC FACTORS 


Products and services can be targeted based on 
where a customer lives—from continent and country 
down to neighborhood and street. Factors 
considered might be as broad as climate and 
population density or as local as types of 
housing, seasonal foods, and community 
groups and clubs. 


DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS 


These are the fundamental factors that define a 
customer profile, including age, gender, marital status, 
ethnicity, income, and occupation. Some age groups 
are identified by specific names, such as millennials 

(those born between the early 1980s and 
mid-1990s) or Generation X (those born in 
the 1960s and 1970s). 


BEFORE YOU START 
Identifying Your Customers 


40/41 


segmenting 

customers 
increase 

revenues 


To understand potential customers, 
it helps to picture them as characters 
or “avatars”. Some simple research 
techniques can be used to compile 


> Study competitors’ social media 
pages for insights into customer 
opinions and behaviors. Compile 
any customer contact details. 


> Read trade or industry blogs and 
articles and note customer-related 
comments and insights. 


Data & Marketing Association, 2014 


Ke Af 


PSYCHOGRAPHIC FACTORS 


This area of segmentation targets customers’ 
interests, values, opinions, personality traits, 
attitudes, and preferences. Psychographic factors 
might include customers’ preferred mode of 
contact, whether they buy mainly organic 
produce, how often they give to charity, 
and which kinds of social media 
they use. 


detailed customer habits and interests. 


BEHAVIORAL FACTORS 


Customers can be further segmented based on their 
shopping and purchasing behavior. For example, 
some may prefer direct contact with certain stores 
and services, while others may buy everything 
online. Customers may prefer to pay more for 
particular brands or shop around for special 
offers and discounts. 


> Identify key influencers who 
have a connection to your product 
or service area, and note the views 
of those who follow them. 


> Make a template for your avatars, 
giving them an identity and filling 
in personal details based on the four 
main areas (see below). 


> Consider the characters who are 
unlikely to be your customers. That 
way, you avoid wasting time on 
marketing to the wrong people. 


Assessing Demand 
for Your Business 


Being enthusiastic about your business is essential, but it is a mistake to 
assume that everyone else shares that enthusiasm. Be objective and carry out 
research to establish what kind of demand there is for your product or service. 


Understanding demand 
In order to sell your product or 


service, there must be a demand for 


it. In other words, there must be 
enough people willing to buy from 
you at a price that will generate a 
profit. You must also consider the 
number of existing suppliers of 


your product (your competitors), product, they will need to be able 
since oversupplying a market can to access it. How will you make 
force down prices, which would this happen? Similarly, if people 
then reduce your potential profits. want your product only at certain 
In addition to the size of the times of the year, or in response 
market, also consider where and to a current trend, your idea may 
when demand exists. For example, not be viable in its current form. 
although people may want your If you are unable to answer 


Developing 
your idea 


To identify and assess the demand 
for your business idea, carry out 
some careful research. This is not 
expensive but will take time. Start 
with a full understanding of your 
current idea, who it is for, and why 
people want it. Research potential 
markets, seek advice, and try out 
your ideas. Take time to review each 
stage and be willing to adapt your 
idea. Be prepared to walk away 
from ideas that will not work, but 
do not give up. Even if you find 
little demand for one idea, you 
may uncover a much better 
alternative during the process. 


Clarify your idea 


To assess the viability of your product or service, find out 
how much demand there is for it. To do this, begin by 
asking yourself the following questions: 


> Who are your customers? Are > Who are your competitors? 
they local, national, or global? What do they offer, and what 
Are there enough of them, and do they charge? Are they a 
can you reach them? threat to your business? 


» What are customers lookingfor? >How are potential competitors 
Would they buy your product? performing? Are they growing, 
What else could you offer instead? stagnating, or failing? 


Conduct desk Refine your idea 
research 


Take time to refine your 
Look online to see idea based on what you have 
what rivals offer learned. Consider rethinking 

and read customer reviews. your product or service if 

Search for statistical data, the market for it is small or 

customer profiles, market already well catered to. 

research reports, and industry 

journals, much of which is 

available at little or no cost. 


BEFORE YOU START 
Assessing Demand for Your Business 


42/43 


these questions about demand, you However, it is worth keeping notes 


will need to modify your ideas, if 
not rethink your business entirely. 


Assessing demand 

There are many ways of assessing 
the demand for your business, 
ranging from doing research into 
your competitors to speaking to 
people in your chosen industry (see 
below). All of this should be done 
at the business planning stage, 
giving you plenty of time to refine 
your ideas if necessary. Only then 
should you think of committing 
resources to your business. 


on all of your ideas and continue 
monitoring the market even after 
you have estimated the demand 
for your business. This is because 
markets can change quickly, and 
you will need to respond swiftly 
to fluctuations in demand, or to 
changes to the ways in which 
you are expected to deliver your 
product or service. The more ideas 
you have, the better placed you 
will be for facing the future—but 
remember not to be blinded by 
your enthusiasm and to listen 

to what your research tells you. 


42% 


of businesses 
fail due to poor 
demand for 
their services 
or products 


Georgia Mcintyre, 
www.fundera.com, 2020 


> Will you have enough 
customers? Will you be able to 
develop a stable customer base? 


>» How much are customers 
willing to pay? How much can 
you charge to make a profit? 


Approach people 


Speak to people in 
the industry, visit 
trade shows, and 
join internet forums. Create 
simple online questionnaires 

and surveys using tools, such as 
Google Forms or SurveyMonkey, 
or try a Twitter poll. Seek the 
opinions of friends and family. 


Know the level of demand 


You should now know what kind of demand there is for your 
product or service. To establish whether it is sufficient to 
support your business, think of the following questions: 


> Will you have too many 
competitors? What can you 
do to keep your customers loyal? 


> What does your competitors’ 
performance mean for you? 
What can you learn from them? 


Refine your idea 


Use the information you have 
learned from other people to 
refine your idea if necessary. 
me, Does your product or service 
meet the demands of the 
people you have spoken to? 


a 


Refine your idea 


Use the feedback from testing 
your product or service to 
refine it, or even to rethink 
your idea if it was poorly 
received. Do not commit 
resources to your business 
until you are sure it is viable. 


SAAN 


X... 


ld ddd 


Test your idea 


If possible, test 
your product 

or service on 
potential customers or clients 
for free. For example, if you 
are offering coaching services, 
offer short sessions to gauge 


Y 


SAAN 


NANA 


X. 


PLISSLSL SS AL ALA Ss 


AN 
-— J. 
#) 


Where to Base 
Your Business 


Selecting the right kind of workspace for your business is an 
important decision. There are a number of options to choose 


from, with pros and cons to each. 


Setting up a workspace 

Deciding where you will work from is a key step in the 
start-up process. Most businesses start life in some 
part of the home—including a garage or shed—and 
may stay there, especially since COVID-19 has changed 
the business landscape, encouraging more flexible 
working. As things get busier, however, you may want 


WORKING FROM HOME 


( # 
's 


My 


Basing yourself at home is an attractive and cost-saving 
option, but you will need to find a dedicated workspace. 


) No commute saves you 
the time, stress, and cost 
of traveling. 


> Flexible working hours 
enable you to start work 
early and to work during 
the evenings if necessary, 
helping you navigate 
your other commitments. 


) Lower costs are possible 
as you have no rental 
or parking fees or other 
transportation costs to 
pay and refreshments 
are prepared at home. 


» Switching off from work 
can be more difficult 
when you can take your 
laptop into any room 
and your office space is 
so easily accessible. 


>» Working in isolation 
can be stressful and 
lonely, and other 
household members 
may be distracting. 


» Ahome address may 
seem less professional to 
clients than a separate 
business address. 


to establish a clearly defined work environment, such 
as an office, studio, or workshop. Having a dedicated 
workspace offers many advantages: it helps free you 
from outside distractions and interruptions; it can be 
tailored to your type of work, with sufficient space for 
equipment; and it can provide, if necessary, a suitable 
environment for meeting customers or clients. It also 


SHARED SPACES 


a 


CNOlct 


le Z Ve ML ork 
yy 


or 


Y 


Some coworking spaces WLP 
Yuvuynnny yy Ue 


Ley LE Ley oN 
___andcommonal Vile 


ICN Cal x|\ 


whi LLM Higher costs tha 
Lia Vous YY 


BEFORE YOU START 
Where to Base Your Business 


44/45 )- 


provides a formal setting for your business, giving it a 
physical base from which to operate. Such spaces come 
at a cost, but there are options. 


Using shared spaces 
Shared workspaces, where basic equipment and 
services (such as internet access) are part of the 
rental package, are now widely available. These 
provide professional settings, where you rent space— 
sometimes a single desk and computer—for as long as 
required. They offer many of the benefits of a private 
office, without the maintenance and setup costs. 

For some businesses, creating the impression of 
having a dedicated workspace is more important than 
having an actual physical space (see box, below right). 


PRIVATE WORKSPACES 


A private office outside your home puts you in control 
and gives you prestige, but it comes at a cost. 


> Private office space, 
whether furnished and 
fully equipped or 
unfurnished, can be 
tailored to your needs. 


> You have privacy and 
can control the work 
environment with fewer 
distractions than if you 
were home-based or 
worked in a shared space. 


> An office address can 
offer more professional 
credibility and a place to 
meet clients. 


> The cost of overheads 
when renting a private 
office space are much 
higher than for a virtual 
office or a home-based 
workspace. 


>» The commute may 
again take time out of 
your day and may add to 
your stress and costs. 


> Networking is not as 
easy as when you 
operate from an open, 
community-based, 
coworking space. 


Storing and warehousing 
Some businesses will need storage space on their 
premises to keep stock safe, dry, and secure and may 
need to rent additional storage space or warehousing. 
Self-storage is one option, but if products have to be 
shipped out to customers, you will have to find 
premises with sufficient room to accommodate 
inventory or rent warehouse storage space. 
Warehousing can offer both storage and logistics 
(the inbound and outbound flow of goods, plus 
transportation and inventory control), but the costs 
may be high. Some distribution and fulfillment 
companies now provide flexible, cost-effective storage 
options, depending on how much you trade each 
season, where you pay only for the storage you use. 


The cost of business premises can be one of the largest 
overheads for a small business, and start-ups may find 
renting office space unaffordable. One possible solution 
is a virtual office—a service that can offer start-ups 
credibility and many of the benefits of a physical office 


for a fraction of the cost. Entrepreneurs can work from 
home but use a telephone-answering service to manage 
calls, as well as reception services, and the option to 
book real meeting rooms when required. A virtual office 
can also offer a business address and mail-handling 
services to give a home-based company greater prestige. 


begin in 
a spare bedroom, garage, 
home 


Entrepreneur Europe, 2020 


Choosing Where to 
Locate Your Start-Up 


Finding a good location for your business can be vital. It will affect 
your costs and may influence the number and type of customers or 
clients you attract. Making the best choice relies on careful analysis. 


Assessing what you need 
Your line of business will determine 
the sort of location you need and 
how important a role location plays. 
If planning to open a restaurant or 
store, for example, you need to be 
where you can maximize trade, but 
location is less critical if you work 
largely online, manufacture goods, 
or sell to trade buyers. Even so, you 


Questions to 
ask yourself 


Before starting your search for 
business premises, work through 
this list of questions. Be as honest 
as you can about the answers, as 
commitments can be difficult to 
undo once you make a decision. 
Also, think about your future needs. 
Working from home may initially 
save costs, but it could leave you 
without the space to expand your 
business. Once your business is up 
and running and you can assess, 
forecast, and monitor its growth 
and development, it may be worth 
setting out a plan for finding the 
right location for expansion when 
it reaches a certain size. 


may need to consider costs, such 
as rent, storage, and transportation, 
and what working environment will 
make you feel comfortable. 

Unless you work from home, you 
will need safe, secure premises in 
a neighborhood that you and any 
employees and clients can travel to 
easily. Parking spaces and easy 
access may also be essential. 


Do | really need 
physical premises? 


Ed 


Many businesses can 
simply be run from 
home, such as those selling online. 
If you need to make alterations to 
your home in order to sell, make 
sure you follow local planning rules. 
If you intend to prepare or sell food 
from your own kitchen, adhere 

to health and safety regulations 
(see pp.212-215). 


What type of 
premises? 


Most people setting up 

a business will rent or 
lease their premises. Think about the 
space you will require. How much 
storage is necessary? Do you need 
an area for preparing food? Can the 
existing premises be adapted to 
create more space and facilities? 


Researching the area 

First, decide on your key criteria 
such as “on a main shopping street’ 
for a retail outlet or “near a station” 
if your business relies on client 
visits. Research information about 
an area and its available business 
premises, and visit commercial 
property agents. Try to single out 
areas where special deals, such as 


7 


Who are my 
customers or clients? 


If customers or clients 
will be visiting your 
premises, you will need to consider 
facilities for them, such as parking 
spaces and possibly toilets. If your 
business provides a service to the 
public, you will also need to ensure 
that your location is fully accessible 
and complies with ADA rules and 
code. 


What sort of building 
and area will best 
suit my business? 


Think about the type 
of space you need to accommodate 
employees, customers, or clients. 
Consider the feel of the surrounding 
neighborhood, the look of the 
premises from the outside, and 
whether its internal layout and 
design match your business's needs. 


cash grants or reductions in local 
taxes, are offered to new 
businesses. Get a feel for an area 
by visiting potential locations. If 
possible, chat with local business 
owners and ask them about the 
area. If enterprises like yours have 
failed there in the past, try to 
discover why, as the reasons may 
be linked to the location. 

Check whether there are any 
restrictive local regulations that 
might affect your business or any 
planned developments that could 
have a detrimental impact on the 
area. Also consider your space and 
service needs and any permissions 
or licenses you may require. 


Can I rely on people 
booking my service 
in advance? 


If you offer a service such 
as hairdressing or beauty treatments, 
you can choose whether people need 
to book ahead or can just show up. 

If you think you can rely entirely on 
appointments, then a tucked-away 
location for your salon, such as a quiet 
side street, should not be a problem. 


Do I need passing 
trade to make my 
business work? 


Attractive premises on 
a popular street is important for a 
business that relies on drawing in 
passersby. However, this usually 
comes at a cost. If you are starting 
a bookkeeping or accounting 
business, for example, an accessible 
office in a professional-looking 
building may be enough. 


BEFORE YOU START 
Choosing Where to Locate Your Start-Up 


46/47 )- 


Does it suit your business? 
Make sure the area you choose is 
right for your style of business. For 
example, siting an upmarket beauty 
salon in a rundown area is unlikely 
to work. Try to view the location 
from the perspective of customers 
in your target market. 

Assess the level of competition 
you will face in a particular area 
and whether this will impede the 
selling of your goods or services. 
Having competitors nearby is not 
always a bad thing. If you run an 
antiques shop, for example, your 
potential customers are likely to be 
browsers, so a similar shop nearby 
may actually increase your traffic. 


Is my business 
seasonal? 


Most rental or lease 

agreements can last 
at least one year, or longer. If your 
business is seasonal or dependent 
on changing tastes and trends, you 
may want to explore a short-term 
lease or consider alternatives, such 
as setting up a “pop-up” facility. 


What is available? 


You will be lucky to 
find ideal premises in 
the perfect location 
at the right price, so you will 
probably have to compromise 

on at least some features. Make 

a list of “must-haves” and a list of 
“nice-to-haves” and be prepared 
to make sacrifices. 


A NEED TO KNOW 


> Lease term is the minimum 
period covered by the lease. 


> Lessee is the person taking out 
a lease on a premises from the 
lessor, the property owner. 


> Renewal options define when 
and under what terms the lessee 
can extend the lease. 


> Security deposit is the amount 
paid by the lessee at the beginning 
of the agreement. This sum is 
returned by the lessor at the 
end of the lease. 


This is a critical 

question because 

the cost of premises is 
fixed, whether you are trading well 
or not. Make sure you are aware 
of all the costs involved and figure 
out what you can afford over the 
term of your rental or lease, based 
on realistic trading estimates. 


Are there any 
other options? 


Instead of having 
premises on a main 
street, could you sell from a mobile 
van or bus? Perhaps you could rent 
space from another small business? 
Locating a small craft store within a 
café could be an advantage for 
both businesses. 


Lid 


omO 


Sourcing Products 
and Supplies 


Consider how and where to find the supplies you need to produce 
your product. Look for stock that is both safe and ethically produced, 
and weigh up whether to source it locally or internationally. 


Choosing suppliers 
There are various factors to 
consider when deciding on a 
supplier, including price, safety, 
quality, and durability of your 
product, along with the (proven) 
reliability of your supplier. Ask who 
else they supply and if they have 
industry-standard documentation. 
It is cheaper to buy direct from 
a manufacturer or factory, but it 
might not be possible to buy your 
supplies in small enough quantities, 
and you may be asked to put down 
a deposit on initial orders. 


Reused or repurposed 


Reused or vintage items have 
environmental benefits and may be 
cheaper, but maintaining consistent quality, 

quantity, and safety may be a problem. 


A distributor (a firm that distributes 
goods on behalf of manufacturers) 
will probably sell smaller amounts, 
though most likely at a higher price. 
Small producers offer a personal 
service, but they may not be able 
to guarantee continuity of supply, 
fast turnaround, or all relevant 
ethical and safety standards. 
Research suppliers by visiting 
trade shows and networking 
with people in your industry via 
LinkedIn or similar websites. Visit 
possible suppliers to see how they 
operate and ensure they grasp the 


Buying from producers nearby supports 
the local community and reduces delivery 
miles. However, local producers often 


needs of your business. If buying 
from abroad, be aware of language 
barriers: communicate simply or 
consider using a translator. 


Make, reuse, or buy? 


In some cases, it might be better to 
make the product yourself rather than 
buy it in. But always consider if this 
time would be better spent enhancing 
or running other aspects of the 
business. Sourcing recycled, reused, 
or repurposed items and materials 
could be a cheap and ethical option. 


Small, local suppliers 


carry a limited range of goods and 
can be more expensive. 


ww =F 7 FT 


BEFORE YOU START 4 Q / 49 ))) 
Sourcing Products and Supplies 


Importing (see pp.212-215) may offer the widest choice 
of suppliers and products, but expect some issues with 
speed and reliability of supply: some countries, such as 
China, can change import/export terms at very short 
notice. It can also be harder to build a relationship 
with a supplier who is far away. 


>» Check whether any special licences are needed: for 
example, some countries prohibit the export or import 
bd of antiques without a licence. 


> Assess how much tax or import duty is to be paid, 


and agree trading terms with your supplier. 


> Set a delivery date with the supplier and agree the 
means of delivery. 

) Discuss potential problems in advance; agree what 
will happen, if, for example, goods do not arrive on time. 

>» Work out how potentially longer shipping times might 
affect your business processes or impact on customers. 

> Investigate ethical standards: are factory conditions 
acceptable? Is the supplier environmentally friendly? 


> Make sure you understand every link of your supply 
chain (see pp.180-181). 


3 x We Paes ea mara 

e 3 » 

3 > 

Se » 

i 4 re | EA 

= x 

Major national suppliers Sourced internationally 
Items that you need to order regularly and Items produced overseas may be cheaper. 
in bulk may be easier to source from major 1 However, you will have to factor in a longer 
national suppliers. While cheaper, your lead-time and may need to outsource 
competitors may be able to buy the sat checking of your items before they 


same stock. are shipped. 


Outsourcing 
Tasks 


Finding professionals to help with specific operational 
tasks costs money, but can save you time and may 
increase your chances of commercial success. 


Identifying your needs 
Getting your business up and 
running can seem overwhelming, 
with many aspects to coordinate, 
such as dealing with customers, 
handling your accounts, and other 
legal requirements, plus providing 
your goods or services. However, 
this can be made simpler by 
looking at each function and 
deciding whether making use of 
external help is a good option. 
Utilizing friends and family with 
specific skills is one possibility, 
while another is to seek out small 
business services that may be 


i, NEED TO KNOW 


> Inventory describes the goods 
produced, or in production, 
that will be sold by a business. 


> Logistics manages how things 
are moved between the point of 
production to the consumer, 
including packaging, distribution, 
and transportation. 

> SLA (service level agreement) is 
a contract that lists the type and 
value of outsourced services, 
along with any conditions, such 
as annual maintenance. 

> Warehousing is the storage 
and management of goods 
waiting to be sent out to 
distributors and consumers. 


Ceerecreresconscssensereesesoneesseene 


available from government or 
civic organizations. You could also 
consider paying a professional for 
their services. This could be a 
one-off commission, such as a web 
designer creating a website, or it 
may be an ongoing arrangement, 
such as using a logistics company 
to store and ship your products. 
These decisions will depend on 
the type of business you are setting 
up: a home-based, graphic design 
studio might need outside help only 
for end-of-year accounting, whereas 
a restaurateur may need a wider 
range of services. 


Using third parties 


Although keeping outgoings to a 
minimum is crucial for any new 
business, paying for outsourced 
services from a specialist can save 
money in the long run. There are a 
wide variety of services you may need. 
An independent professional can 
provide a fresh perspective, pointing 
out problems or suggesting solutions. 
However, before enlisting external 
services, it is important to be clear 
about the specific needs of your 
business and have an idea of budget. 
Ask for quotes before making a 
decision and research the outsourcers 
thoroughly. If there are no reviews 
online, ask for examples of their work 
and references from previous clients, 
and never pay for anything upfront. 


Marketing 

If your business needs 

specialist marketing 

expertise, a particular 
form of marketing, such as social 
media, or you want to launch a 
bigger campaign than you can 
handle in-house, you will need 
to go to professional marketers. 


> Creating content 
>» Managing social media 
» Running email marketing 


Website design 
and maintenance 
Regular website 
maintenance is crucial 
for an e-commerce business 
and can be outsourced to an IT 
specialist, who may also offer 
website design. Occasional 
maintenance will suffice for less 
website-dependent businesses. 


>» Managing updates 


> Hosting website 


> Search engine optimization 


IT 

For occasional or 

longer term IT needs, 

freelance or agency 
experts can improve computer 
networks and operating systems, 
as well as maximize the 
performance of your website. 


» Developing apps 
> Implementing new technology 
> Troubleshooting 


Customer care 

A customer relationship 

specialist can respond, 

on your behalf, to your 
customer calls or emails in a timely 
manner, as well as provide after- 
sales follow-up, if required, and 
data management. 


> Handling sales 
> Dealing with complaints 
>» Customer service training 


Accounting 
Accountants can help 
with the initial business 
setup, submit annual 
tax returns, or provide monthly or 
quarterly services. Fees are tax- 
deductible, and it is one of the most 
commonly outsourced services. 


> Preparing tax returns 
> Running monthly sales data 
> Ensuring payment of sales tax 


BEFORE YOU START 
Outsourcing Tasks 


50/51 


Logistics 

Outsourcing logistics 

means that when orders 

come in, someone else 
handles their fulfillment and 
distribution, along with warehousing, 
product inventory, and insurance. 


>» Warehousing 
>» Managing inventory 
> Packing and shipping 


Legal and HR 
A solicitor can help you 
draft business contracts 
and legal agreements, 
as well as guide you on the latest 
regulations. An HR advisor can assist 
you with staffing issues and contracts. 


> Drafting licensing contracts 


> Drawing up business partner 
and rental agreements 


> Preparing employee contracts 


Manufacturing 

Unless your product 

is unique, few small 

businesses will invest 
in building a manufacturing 
plant; the most viable alternative 
is to use an existing manufacturer. 
They can also produce prototypes 
or samples of your product. 


> Designing products for 
manufacture 


) Producing components 
> Assembling products 


Payroll 

A payroll provider 

charges a monthly fee 

in return for handling 
the payment of staff wages, 
automatically deducting amounts 
owing for tax and insurance. 
Using a bookkeeper is another, 


cheaper way to run payroll and 
monthly sales data. 


» Managing payroll 
> Data entry and processing 
> Distributing paychecks 


Recruitment 
Finding just the right 
person for a position 
can be a struggle. 

A recruitment agency may 

help, producing a short list of 

candidates and charging a 

one-off fee or a percentage 

of the new recruit’s salary. 


> Headhunting for senior roles 
> Providing contract staff 
> Workforce planning 


Striking a Balance 


Running your own business can be exciting, challenging, and 
highly rewarding, but it is important not to ignore other aspects 


of your life. Striking a healthy work-life balance is essential. 


Setting boundaries 

Starting your new business is both 
exciting and highly demanding. 
You have to put in time and effort, 
but long hours can take their toll, 
affecting your relationships and 
your health. Try to draw clear 
boundaries between work and 
leisure. To create a good work-life 
balance, aim for routine working 
hours, starting and finishing at the 
same times each day, and make 
sure you take a lunch break. If you 
are based at home, try to mark the 
transition from work to leisure with 
an end-of-work ritual, such as going 
for a swim, walk, or jog. 

Set boundaries around physical 
spaces to separate work and home 
areas. You might want to establish 
a dedicated workspace at home, 
ideally a separate room or another 
area reserved solely for work. If you 
have sufficient resources, you could 
consider building a shed to work in 
or renting an office, studio, or 
business space elsewhere. 


open your mind to new ideas. 


> Take regular breaks throughout the day. 
> Exercise to clear your head, relieve stress, and 


> Do not neglect your diet. Junk food causes sugar 
spikes, which can leave you feeling hungry and tired. 
> Practice meditation or mindfulness, together with 
deep-breathing exercises to relax your body and mind. 
> Stick to a sleep routine, based on your natural 
sleep-wake cycle, to ensure you get the rest you need. 


If you have employees, consider how 
you can help maintain their work-life 
balance, too. This may mean a flexible 
approach that focuses more on their 
productivity than on being present for 
a set number of hours per day. This 
approach also helps build a happy, 
dynamic team. 


Work-life balance 


While your business may suffer if 
you are distracted by personal 
worries, your partner or family 
may also feel neglected if you 
are always working. It is 
possible to get the balance 
right. Agreed routines and 
good communication 
can ensure that your 
work life and home 
life complement 
each other rather 
than clash 
head-on. 


BEFORE YOU START Fi 3 ))) 
Striking a Balance bh 2 b 


30% aa 


> Find a mentor to bounce ideas 


° off. Local chambers and members 

of small busi ness groups associated with your 
industry can offer peer mentoring 

owners re po rt or networking events, and it can 
be helpful to talk to others who 


wo rki ng more than understand the pressures of 


running a business. 


50 hou rs per week > Stay social and meet up with 


friends to keep you grounded and 
put work concerns in perspective. 


> Draw up aschedule to block 
out work and leisure time 
activities, and maintain it to 
monitor balance. 


www.thealternativeboard.com, 2013 


Childcare is a challenge for all 
working parents and especially for 
those who run their own business. 
Organizing work around childcare 
responsibilities can help and is why 
parents often choose to start a 


home-based business. 


‘> Instead of working traditional 
9-5 hours, parents may choose 
to work from 9 a.m. until 3 p.m., 
stopping work to collect children 
from childcare or school, then 
spending time as a family before 
resuming work once children 
are in bed. 


> Parents can share the load by 
taking it in turns with co-parents 
or friends to do the school run 
when they have time-sensitive 
tasks, such as presentations to 
finish or urgent emails to send. 


Working with 
Family and Friends 


You can make a success of your business by working with family and 
friends who share your vision. However, it is advisable to set rules 
and boundaries that keep your working relationships professional. 


Working together 

There are many advantages to 
working with family and friends. 
You know and trust each other and 
can be more relaxed. You all have 

a vested interest in the business, 
shared values, and a shared desire 
to succeed, which often means that 


Agreeing the rules 


team members are more flexible 
and more willing to make sacrifices 
than other employees might be. Yet 
to avoid misunderstandings that 
could damage that bond and lead 
to resentment or disappointment, it 
is important to set guidelines and 
put processes in place early on. 


The bonds you share with family and friends are intensely personal, so working 
with them is both a pleasure and a challenge. Agreeing on roles and settling on 
job descriptions is an important first step. You must also decide practical details, 
such as vacation time and how expenses will be claimed. Discussing your goals 
can help cement the team, but you will need to be able to address disputes, too. 


Agree on roles 


Try to be objective and think about what value each 
friend or family member is adding. They may be 
providing finances, or perhaps they came up with the 
idea for a new product or service, or have useful access 
to contacts. Knowing the strengths of each team member 
will help you and others plan what they should do. Agree 
on roles with them and create job descriptions as you 


would for any other employee. 


Facing issues 

Start by gathering your team 
together and asking everyone to 
write down their hopes for the 

new business—and their concerns. 
Discussing these points, which are 
likely to vary, leads to a greater 
awareness of everyone’s perspective. 


WEB Kak iA 


Create formal processes 


in writing. 


Consult your team members and agree to guidelines 

on how the business will run. These may include voting 
rights, rewards, vacation time, and how expenses will be 
claimed. They should also cover what will happen in the 
event of a dispute, such as two people wanting to take 
their vacation at the same time, which is not uncommon 
in family businesses. Once decided, put the agreement 


You should also create a charter 
(see pp.28-—29) to establish team 


members’ roles and responsibilities. 


It is important to draw up a legal 
agreement that sets down any 
investments in the company that 
individual members have made 
and establishes how assets and 
investments would be divided if 
the business does not work out. 
While the bonds of friendship 
and family can create a supportive 
workplace environment, there must 
be boundaries in place that prevent 
special treatment. If a friend or 
family member does something 


walk alone. 


BEFORE YOU START 
Working with Family and Friends 


54/55 


wrong or illegal that could damage 
the enterprise, you need to respond 
as if they were any other employee 
in the company. Failing to act could 
set a terrible example to other 
members of the team. 

Working with friends and family 
can be fun, but the team must 
operate professionally. Good 
communication is key to settling 
disputes and misunderstandings 
and dealing with the changes that 
every business experiences as it 
grows. Your strength is the stake 
you all have in the business and the 
shared goal of making it a success. 


walk together. 


Ratan Tata, former chairman of Tata group 


OUR GOALS 


[A NEED TO KNOW 


> Buy-sell agreement sets out 
how shareholders can sell stock, 
who can buy it, and under what 
circumstances it can be sold. 


> Owners’ council is when the 
business owners gather to discuss 
their goals and direction and relay 
their thoughts to its board. 


> Succession planning involves 
deciding who will lead your new 
business if you are unable to work 
for any reason. Without such a 
plan, the business could fail. 


Create shared goals 


Discuss the goals of the business and the strategy 
and tactics you believe will achieve them. Make sure 
everyone has a chance to contribute their ideas and 
that all team members understand what needs to be 
done. When working with friends and family, it is 
easy to assume that they are thinking the same thing 
as you, but it could be the case that each person has 
a slightly different picture in their head. 


Avoid and resolve conflict 


Good communication is essential to avoid conflict. 
If a problem arises, try to talk it through. Do not rush 
to judgment, but listen to your friend or family 
member. Create a process, if possible, for resolving 
serious disputes. Overwork can make people 
impatient and irritable; remember that it is just as 
important for those involved in family businesses as 
it is for others to have time for leisure and relaxation. 


Choosing a Name 


First impressions count, so consider carefully when deciding on a name 
for your business. Think about how to make it descriptive, catchy, unique, 
and, above all, memorable, so you stand out from the competition. 
Getting it right 


Formal names can convey ideas of reliability and trust 


Since your company’s name is likely to be the first 
thing customers note about your business, it is crucial 
to get it right. Decide whether it should personify what 
your start-up offers, reflect your values, or capture your 
brand's personality (see pp.60-61). 

Sole proprietors looking to build a personal brand 
might include their own name and a description of 
what the business does. Businesses targeting local 
clients might include their location in the name. 


What makes 
a good name? 


The best names are memorable 
for the right reasons—they are 
accessible and have positive 
associations. They should be 
easy to say, write, and spell, 

and should be an asset to 

your business. If you plan to 
trade internationally, check 
how your name translates 

in other languages. 


but may lack youthful appeal. Your name should be 
simple, easy to say, and easy to remember. A name 
that is fun, clever, or humorous may grab attention, but 
be careful because wordplay may not translate, and 
you risk your start-up not being taken seriously. 
Research your business field to make sure that your 
preferred name is not already in use. If it is similar to 
another company’s name or trademark (see pp.96—97), 
you may have to change it—or face a costly lawsuit. 


Unique 


Your company’s 
name needs to be 
unique to avoid legal 
issues or confusion 
with other brands. 
Consider making up 
a new word. IKEA, 
for instance, is an 
acronym of the 
name of the founder, 
his family’s farm, and 
his home town. 


Simple 


A simple name with 
fewer syllables is 
easier to recall, say, 
and search for— 
Skype or Twitter, for 
example. Customers 
might abbreviate 
longer names to a 
less favorable 
version. Unusual 
spellings can also 
backfire, so take care. 


REGISTERING YOUR NAME 


You must register your company’s 
name with the appropriate 
government agency (see pp.212-215), 
and perhaps at local or state level, 
too. Depending on the legal form 
you choose for your business, the 
name may end in a suffix such as LLC 
(Limited Liability Corporation) or Inc. 
(Incorporated). You must also 
register for corporation tax when 
you register your business name. 
Sole proprietors and partnerships 
are required to register the name of 


\ 


— 


} 


their businesses only if they choose 
a “doing business as” name. Whether 
sole proprietor, partnership, or 
company, make sure you register 

a domain name for your business 
(see pp.114-115). This is the internet 
address that you will use for your 
website. While a fee is payable, 
registering will give you sole use 

of that address. The domain name 
does not have to be the same as 
your business name, but it helps if 
the two are fairly similar. 


#24 & 


FIRST STEPS 
Choosing a Name 


58/59 


BE AWARE 


> Search national business 
registers to see whether your 
prospective name has already 
been taken (see pp.212-215). 
Sole proprietors can consult 
local website listings. 


> Check trademark registers and 
intellectual property office sites 
(see pp.212-215). 

» Look at domain names, as you 
cannot register one that is taken, 
as well as social media, too. 


Descriptive 


You might decide 
onaname for your 
company after 
compiling a list of 
brief descriptors of 
what your business 
does. Facebook, 
WeChat, and Netflix 
all have names that 
convey their 


purpose or function. 


Meaningful 


A name that has 
meaning behind it 
makes for a more 
compelling brand 
story. LEGO, for 
example, comes from 
the Danish term leg 
god, to “play well.” 
The name Hotmail 
arose from HTML, 
the language used 
to write web pages. 


Unusual 


Company names 
that seem unrelated 
to the nature of the 
business may also be 
highly successful, as 
they can capture 
attention. Good 
examples include 
online retailer, 
Amazon, and IT and 
media giant, Apple. 


Alliterative 


Using alliteration— 
starting words with 
the same sound or 
letter—makes names 
fun to say and is 
another way to make 
them memorable. 
Brand names such 
as Coca-Cola or 
TikTok, for example, 
stand out through 
their alliteration. 


Developing 
Your Brand 


A brand is a tool for helping a business stand out from the crowd. 
Creating and refining your own brand will enable you to inform 
customers what your business is about—and what sets it apart. 


Creating a brand In order to attract sales, the particular personality, such as 

Your brand is more than just a owners might promote the idea a spirited or youthful outlook 

logo or design used for advertising. that the product is sustainable, (see below). 

It is ameans of communicating ethical, and healthy. By building You must be consistent and 

your company’s purpose and these values into their brand, the authentic, however. For instance, 

values to your customers. start-up owners can convey the if customers discover that the drink 
Imagine, for example, that a benefits of their product to contains artificial ingredients or is 

start-up develops a new fruit drink customers. In addition to its values, sourced unethically, they may lose 

made only from organic ingredients. the brand might also embody a faith in your brand. 


Deciding on your brand 
Consider what your customers are looking for, what you BRAND PERSONALITY 


are offering, and what your company stands for. Ensure 
—— Bold 
( ) Carefree, J 
spirited, 
a pare 
aaa 


that these align. Your brand is about conveying your values, 
Sophisticated | @ | Rugged 
Exclusive, Tough, strong, 
romantic, outward-bound, 
elegant | | | masculine 


such as being ethical, along with your “personality,” which 
is the public perception of your company’s character. Traditional 
Reliable, 
comforting, 
familiar 


e 
Developing the concept Choosing your brand personality 
Consider the benefits that your customers derive from Your brand's personality is the human characteristics 
your products or services. Then decide what ideas you that you would like to be linked to your brand. So, 
would like customers to associate with your brand. This if your target audience is involved with sports, for 
could be notions such as “traditional and reliable,” example, you might want your brand's personality 


nu 


“sophisticated and exclusive,” “rugged,” or “bold.” to embody energy and vibrancy. 


FIRST STEPS 60 / 6 1 yy) 
Developing Your Brand 


It is wise to register your brand as 
your trademark (see pp.212-—215), so 


that rivals cannot imitate it and French professor of marketing strategy Jean-Noél Kapferer created the Brand 


undermine your business. Identity Prism in 1996, with six aspects he considered vital to brand identity. 
Personal branding Physique The brand's physical Personality The type of 
Developing a personal brand appearance, materials, and qualities, person the brand would be 


including its packaging and color. if it were human. 


can also be highly beneficial for 
freelancers and contractors. It 
is a reflection of how you present 


Relationship The bond between 


the brand and the consumer, Culture The building of a cult 


yourself to colleagues and clients. which is particularly important for followings Soe te rome 
: : P ; brand's country of origin. 
Like a business brand, a personal retailers and the service sector. 
brand encompasses outward 
appearance but is also about your Reflection The outward mirror: Self-image The inward mirror: 
behavior—if people are to trust the type of person the consumer how the company perceives its 


you, your actions must be genuine perceives the brand to be aimed at. own brand. 


and consistent. 


Audio-visual elements 
Use memorable symbols, 


phrases, and sounds that 
resonate with customers. 
Brand name 

Choose a name that reflects 
your brand concept; make 
it both different and 


memorable (see pp.58-59). 


Preference 


Design and packaging 
Pick a style that reflects your 
image and values. If you are 
a green business, choose 
recyclable material. 
Strapline 

Use a few words to 
encapsulate what your 
business is about. Keep 

it short and snappy. 


Communicating your brand identity Nurturing the relationship 

Brainstorm how you can best convey your brand to Branding is really about creating a lasting relationship with 
potential customers, perhaps through eye-catching the customer, (see (pp.62-63). People will remain loyal and 
design, a distinctive logo, and an unforgettable slogan. be preferential to your brand if they can empathize with its 
Remember that you may need to communicate your concept, personality, and values. Ensure everything you do 


brand across more than one media platform. reinforces this relationship and does nothing to harm it. 


Story 


Telling Your 


People like to buy from businesses they feel reflect their own beliefs. Creating 
a story around your brand will encourage your customers and clients to feel a 
connection with you, leading to a sense of commitment and loyalty. 


Boosting your brand 
More than just a description of how 
you began your business, a brand 
story reveals your personal reasons 
and motivations for doing so and 
underlines what it stands for. 
When people choose a product or 
service, their decision can be based 


as much on emotion as it is on logic. 


While customers and clients 
consider price, quality, and 
availability when making a choice, 
many prefer to buy from people and 
companies they like and respect. 

If you can convey the personality 
of your business to your customers 
and clients in the form of a story, it 
will help you differentiate your 


product or service from that of 
competitors and encourage trust, 
loyalty, and repeat business. A 
powerful story also makes your 
business more memorable—much 
more effectively than logos and 
slogans do. Putting people at the 
heart of your story will attract 
potential employees, too. 


DEVELOP YOUR STORY 


How to tell the story 


Your brand story must attract the attention 

of your audience and maintain their interest 
throughout. If you sell ethically sourced goods, 
explain why, what you have seen, and what 
motivated you. Keep it concise and compelling 
but also authentic and unique to your business 
so that it appeals to your target audience. 


At its heart, your story must encapsulate your 
business's origin and core values. Think about the 
problem or personal goal that drove you and the 
insight that inspired you to solve that problem or 

achieve that goal. Describe the ways in which your 
business meets those expectations today, and tie this 
in with your vision for its future (see pp.24-25). 


people love 
55% 
are more likely 


The Brand Storytelling Report, Headstream, 2015 


FIRST STEPS 6 y / 5 3 ))) 
Telling Your Story 


PROP CORTE STOTT ESOT ESE SET OTE EES ES ETHOS SEEHEHEEETEHTHSESEOHSHEEETOHEHESEEEHSETOEEESESESES 


Shaping your story ft fl 
It takes time and planning to create an effective brand BE AWARE 


story. Begin by asking yourself what motivated you to 


: f > Do not make false claims. If your story is not genuine, 
start your business. Perhaps it was because you could ¥ y B 


when the truth emerges, your customers will no longer 


not find something you wanted to buy so decided to trust you, and your brand will be damaged. 
make it yourself or because you were passionate about > Focus on what makes your business different. Your 
a particular product or service and excited to make it story must be unique and stand apart from that of 
more widely available. Look beyond the potential your competitors. 
financial rewards and consider what makes you > Make sure that daily operations live up to the 
excited about your business, and then jot down some story you tell your clients, and reflect the message 
words that express your emotional responses. behind your brand. 

Think about your customers and clients. How would » Encourage colleagues to understand and embrace 
you like them to feel when they trade with you? What your business's core message and the values you want 
would you like them to say about your business? Note to convey to your customers and clients. 


the answers to these questions and keep reviewing 
them. You can then weave the elements you have 
compiled into a positive and convincing brand story. aera eG ne re ATi Mee wd) MNTn CATIA ISR Rima S IA SONI WRT 


TARGET YOUR AUDIENCE SPREAD THE WORD 


Not everyone will be your customer or client, and not Share your brand story on the social media sites 

everyone will share your values, so tailor your story to most used by your customers (see pp.140-141). If you 
those who will and do. Use the information you have have a website, post messages, images, and videos 
gained about your market, and potential customers relating to your story on it. As you gain more 
and clients (see pp.38-39), to target your brand story customers and clients, actively engage with them 
accordingly. For example, if you have identified that to build closer relationships. Try to gain the support 
your customers or clients are likely to have families, of online “influencers” who may share your story 

weave a family element into your story. with their followers (see pp.198-199). 


A Marketing Mix 


When planning a product launch or marketing campaign, you need to 
consider four key elements that together make up the “marketing mix”: the 
product or service itself, its price, how it is promoted, and where it is sold. 


Using the mix The next is the price structure, reflecting what your 
The success of your product or service—however target market will accept. You must then decide how 
brilliant or innovative—relies on sales. To achieve good to promote your offering and where and how to 
sales, you need a well-targeted marketing approach, distribute it. Each of these ingredients is a powerful 
using a mix of four ingredients. The first is your tool you can use to persuade target customers that 


product or service itself and what it offers the customer. your product or service is what they want and need. 


Ye 


proc jue? ti 


4Cs—consumer- 
oriented 


Commodity, cost, communication, 
and convenience emphasize that 
customers are influencing the 


ingredients in the marketing mix. COMMODITY COST 
> Has the product been designed, > What will attract the customer? 
» developed, and possibly even Premium quality? Low cost? 
4 : modified to meet and exceed > Do customers make buying 
customer expectations? 


decisions for this kind of product 
> How and why will the design, based on quality or on budget? 
size, features, color, and packaging 


suey > Will target customers think it 
appeal to a specific niche market? 


represents good value? 


FIRST STEPS 


A Marketing Mix 64 / 6 b ))) 


Product, price, promotion, and place make up the 
“APs,” the traditional marketing mix. Today, many 
businesses use the newer “4C” mix that combines 
commodity, cost, communication, and convenience. 
This approach shows the increasing importance of 
focusing on your customers and their experience and 
of seeking out niche rather than mass markets. To 
get it right, you must define and analyze your target 
market, then examine each element in the marketing 
mix to ensure that it will attract customers and meet 


their expectations. 


ao 
a 


yuna 
ae 


COMMUNICATION 


> What type of messages get 
the best customer response? 

> What marketing information 
will interest your customers? 

> How do customers prefer to 
receive marketing messages? Are 
the messages relevant to them? 


\ (oy 
- = 


iden aumiledes 
sage ey re i cr 
sie arene 


A Meee Saat 
one 


CONVENIENCE 


> How convenient is it for busy 
customers to find, buy, and get 
the product into their hands? 

> What can be done to make 
this process as simple and 
straightforward as possible? 


“The 4Ps was about ‘What 
does the marketer want to 
say?’ while the 4Cs asks 
“What does the customer 
need to hear that the 
marketer can say?” 


Robert F. Lauterborn, originator of the 4Cs 


We 
Ss 
a tha 
ey 
sich io — 
ae a es 


To the original 4Cs, some businesses 
add an extra 3Cs. These are: 


) Corporation Does the company 
structure, its competitors, or 
stakeholders unduly influence 
the marketing drive and results? 

) Consumer Do you know what 
the customer needs and wants, 
and do the marketing materials 
and product itself address this? 

) Circumstances Can the business 
cope with adverse external factors 
that might impact sales? 


Process 


The Selling 


You may have great products or services, but you still have to sell them. 
To do this, you will need to understand the selling process and know 
how to build relationships with customers to generate further sales. 


Understanding sales channels 
There are many routes, or channels, to bring goods 
and services to market so that consumers can buy 
them. These sales channels range from online and 
retail to selling direct to the customer and selling 
through a third party. Before deciding what channel is 
right for your business, reflect on what makes people 
buy your type of product or service and where they buy 
them from. Consider the qualities of your product or 
service. Are customers more likely to buy your product 
if they can see and feel it? Is yours the type of service 
people can buy online, such as producing illustrations? 
Whatever the approach, there are basic principles to 
follow when you are selling. Know your audience and 
speak to them in a way that they can relate to. If you 
are selling a piece of technology to people who are not 
technically proficient, use words they will understand. 
If you are selling face-to-face, do not describe at length 
why your offering is so good. Listen to your customer 
and let them know that their opinions matter. 


GI BE AWARE 


> Thinking about price is one of the most important 
factors when selling. Find out what your customers 
really value, and be prepared to adjust your price. 


> Pay attention to your existing customers for they are 
your best prospects for future sales. 

> Tailor what you say to different types of customers, 
based on their individual buying behavior. Do not 
use the same message for everyone. 

> Beware of not listening enough to your customers. 
Your business will benefit from what they tell you. 


Fulfilling orders 

Once you have made a sale you need to fulfil the order. 
Think about your customers’ expectations, such as 
when they will expect to receive their order, and make 
the process straightforward. You may decide to take 
orders and despatch the goods yourself. However, as 
your business grows, you may want to outsource this 
task to a third party, such as an e-fulfilment company 
(see pp.74—-75). 


The sales funnel 


A good way of thinking about the selling process 

is imagining it as a funnel—one that shows the 
stages prospective customers go through before 
making a purchase, each step bringing them closer 
to becoming a customer. At the top of the funnel, 
there is a large number of prospective customers, 
but these become fewer and fewer as you descend 
through the funnel to the people who actually buy 
your goods. Your job is to make sure there are 
enough customers in the funnel to generate 
sufficient sales for your business. 


serve our 
customers 


always right. 


Manish Chopra, CEO of Little 


FIRST STEPS 5 5 i 67/ 
The Selling Process 


POPC RESTO SATOH AHSHHCOTESEHSTOTEHSSHE OTE SEHESES SHOOT E OTE HEHEHE ESESETOEEEESOSODESEO®S 


1 Awareness 


This is the stage at which prospective customers become aware 

of your product or service. Promote awareness through activities 
such as writing blogs, being active on social media, advertising, and 
putting your products on display. The key is to focus their attention 
on your business and away from others. 


2 Interest 


Once you have gained attention, you need to keep it by 
creating interest. Consider how you can persuade someone 
to spend more time looking at what you have to offer. A good 
way to do this is to think about what problem you are helping 
the prospective customer solve and focus on that. 


3 Decision 


At this stage, your prospect is seriously thinking about 
making a purchase and is probably weighing alternatives. 
Use supporting material to remove any doubts and help 
them reach their decision. Provide testimonials from satisfied 
customers or helpful comparisons with other products. 


4 Action 


Once your prospective customer has made a 
decision, you will need to encourage them to 
act on it. Make it obvious how they complete 
their purchase and make it as easy as possible. 


sevcoseove 


Online Selling 


Selling online gives you access to a much wider market, while also 
saving on the cost of a “bricks-and-mortar” shop. There are several 


platforms you can use to sell to customers. 


Identifying online opportunities 

There are obvious advantages to selling your products 
online, such as avoiding the ongoing expense of 
maintaining a physical shop, being able to sell at any 
time of day or night, and reaching a much wider 
market. On the other hand, you face the challenges 

of customers being able to find you when searching 
online (see pp.118-119) and having to compete with 
all the other thousands of offerings on the internet. 


To sell online, you have a number of options: to 

set up your own website; to use an e-commerce 
site-builder; or to sell your products through an 

online marketplace. 


Using third-party sites 

While creating your own site gives you complete 
control over how it looks and functions (see pp.114— 
117), it takes time, money, and expertise. In contrast, 


Choosing your platform 


There are several ways you can sell online, with 
advantages and disadvantages to each approach. 

The platform you choose will depend on your product. 
If selling a personal service, then your own website 
may be preferable. If your product is very expensive, 
you may want to choose an online marketplace that 
charges a smaller commission on your sale—or even 
use a range of platforms for your various products. 


online global 
e-retail sales 


Office for National Statistics, 2020 


Your own website 
Building your own website allows you 
_ to create a virtual shopping experience 


that reflects your brand. You can also 
use additional software, allowing your site to take 
secure payments, and process invoices and shipments. 


) Website promotes your unique brand 

) Easy to change when necessary and according to 
how shoppers use it 

» No concerns about changing internal algorithms, as 
found on online marketplaces, such as Amazon 

) Easy to tailor your structure to improve searchability 
using search engine optimization 


) Takes time and money to maintain, market, and 
host online 


> Requires technical knowledge to create and maintain 

> Payment and data security are essential and your 
responsibility: you will be liable for any breaches 

» Larger competitors’ websites are easy to find and 
may offer customers a better shopping experience 


FIRST STEPS 
Online Selling 


68/69 IE 


e-commerce site builders, such as Shopify or Wix, 
offer ready-made website templates onto which you 
simply drag and drop your content. They also provide 
secure payment systems, customer data protection, 
and elements such as shopping carts, search bars, 
wishlist functions, and review options. 

Alternatively, you can sell your products on large 
online marketplaces, such as Amazon, eBay, Etsy, 
or Facebook Marketplace, which also have the 
necessary infrastructure. Whichever option you 
choose, your customers will buy your products only 
if they like what they see and read. Be sure to describe 
them clearly and accurately and include attractive, 
but honest, images. 


E-commerce site builders 


These website builders specialize 


_ in e-commerce and offer software 
services for free or by subscription. 
You can choose from a template and fill in information 
fields to create a site and use the shopping cart 
systems to sell, ship, and manage your products. 


> Easy to set up, requiring little technical knowledge 
and no ongoing maintenance 

)» Commonly multilingual, so more likely to appeal to 
a global audience 


> Provides secure payment and data systems, and other 
e-commerce tools, with some guarantees and insurance 


> Fees are payable, either as a subscription or as 
commission charged on sales—typically 2-5 percent 
or more 

> Customer service terms and conditions are set by 
the site builder, with no flexibility 

> Site structure is fixed by the site builder, which might 
not be optimized for search engines 

> Design is limited to the site’s available templates 


If you are selling on your own website, rather than an 
online marketplace, it will be up to you to make your site 
visible to potential customers. Most people search the 
internet using a search engine, such as Google, which 


creates a list of sites related to your search term. As most 
users only view the first few options listed, website 
owners compete to be as close to the top of these lists 
as possible. There are various ways you can optimise 
your website for search engines and improve your 
ranking (pp.118-119). 


Online marketplaces 


These sites are like huge, online 


_ supermarkets, where thousands 
of products are listed internationally. 
To sell on these sites, you just need to create an 
account, choose a selling plan (in some cases), 
and then list your items. 


» Noneed to create or market a website 

» Easier to market your product 

> Massive marketplace with international reach 

> Multilingual and can deal with different currencies 
) E-commerce tools are all supplied 


> Thousands of sellers make it hard to stand out 

> Referral fees (the commission the sites take when items 
are sold) can be high—up to 45 percent depending on 
the site and product sold 

> Site structure and selling terms are fixed and may 
not suit your business 


an 


Providing 
a Service 


When clients sign up for a service, they do so on trust. Unlike buying a 
product, there is nothing to handle or see before they part with money. 
Every aspect of your service must meet, or exceed, their expectations. 


Making promises 

Providing services involves using 
your skills and knowledge to satisfy 
the needs of your clients—you 

and what you do must meet their 
expectations. Because of this, the 
relationship between you and your 
clients is closer—and more 
important—than it is for a business 
that sells a product. By offering a 
service, you are making a promise 
to do something for your client and 
satisfy their needs. 

In order to run a successful 
service-based business, you must 
thoroughly understand your clients’ 
requirements and do everything 
you can to make their experience 
of buying from you a positive one. 
You must also convey a sense of 
trustworthiness—that you will at 
least deliver on your promise, and 


eo MAKING IT WORK 


> Stay in touch with your clients after 
the initial service; for example, by 
sending newsletters that will be 
useful or interesting to them. 


> Keep looking for ways to improve 
your service, and keep up-to-date 
with whatever is happening in your 
business sector. 

> Regularly try your competitors’ 
services to see what they do, and 
how you can surpass their offerings. 


hopefully even exceed it. Examine 
and analyze all the various stages 
your client will have to go through 
as part of their experience with 
you, from seeing your marketing 
material to using your service and 
their satisfaction with it afterward. 


Identifying expectations 
When planning your business, 
always consider the services you 
intend to offer from your clients’ 
perspective. For example, if you are 
planning a dog-grooming service, 
think about the level of service you 
would expect yourself from such a 
business, the kind you would be 
happy to receive, and what would 
encourage you to return there. If 
you intend to target a particular 
clientele with your service, such 

as older or more affluent people, 


> Deal with problems immediately 
and try to put things right for clients. 


> Maintain your passion for what 
you do to generate enthusiasm and 
to make your clients feel excited 
about experiencing your service. 


» Remain alert for related services 
you could offer; for example, if you 
are a personal fitness instructor, you 
could also offer a sports massage 
service or nutrition advice. 


research their requirements 
carefully, because their needs 
are likely to be very specific. 

It is important that you are clear 
about exactly what your clients will 
receive when they sign up to, and 
pay for, your service. To ensure 
clarity, write an SLA (Service-Level 
Agreement), which defines and 
agrees the commitment between 
you and your client in terms of 
service quality, responsibilities, 
and availability. 


How to create a 
successful service 


Maintaining a strong relationship 
with your clients is central to running 
a successful service business. Treat 
relationship building as an ongoing 
process—one that is essential to 
growing a loyal client base. Take time 
to understand your clients’ needs. Be 
prepared for those needs to change, 
and look for ways to adapt, enhance, 
or add to the services you offer in 
order to keep clients interested. 
Most important, always be honest, 
since the relationship relies on trust, 
which is easily lost. 


FIRST STEPS 
Providing a Service 70 Mg 15 1 we 


SOP C OREO HAO TESTE HTO HTH EEH ES OES OSTOTAESEHEO HES HOSES OEEHE OEE OEH OSTEO EESS eaevecce eevccos 


Generating 
trust 


Your clients will trust you if 
you are honest about what you 


can and cannot do. If you are Exceeding 
unable to offer a particular expectations 
service, suggest another business Personalize your service by 
that can. Both the potential getting to know your clients and 
client and the business showing you care. Own up to 


mistakes and apologize, and offer 
no-quibble refunds. Surprise 
your clients, perhaps by 
sending birthday wishes 
or even a small gift. 


will remember you. 


Creating loyalty 
among clients 


The key factor in winning loyalty 
will be the quality of the service you 
provide. Back that up with excellent 

customer service, as well as 
incentives such as discounted rates, 
special offers, easier payment 
terms, or other “rewards” for 
longer-term clients. 


Being easy 
to work with 
Be welcoming and friendly, 
and put people at ease. Always 
reply promptly to messages from 
clients. Make sure it is easy to 
book, pay for, and even cancel 
your services.People will be 
more willing to sign up if 
they feel in control. 


Understanding 
clients’ needs 


Do not assume you know 
what your clients want. Ask 
people for feedback and discuss 
ideas for improving services with 
them. Do this regularly so that 
the services you provide can 
evolve to meet their 
changing needs. 


Taking Payments 


For your business to succeed, you will need to be able to accept 
payments electronically. Give customers several payment options, so it 
is easier for them to make purchases and for fewer sales to fall through. 


Paying electronically 

To enable a customer to pay electronically (using a 
debit or credit card either in person or online), you need 
to open an account with a merchant service provider, 
who will give you access to their e-payment system in 
return for a fee. Merchant services provide payment 
gateways (for online transactions) and payment 
processors (for use in person), and act as intermediaries 
to communicate between your customer’s source of 
funds, typically a bank, and your own bank or other 
type of financial account. Some merchant providers can 
offer combined gateway and processor technology. If 
you make sales with the customer in person, you need 
a payment processor combined with a terminal—a 


device that reads the customer’s debit or credit 

card, or the mobile wallet on their phone. Merchant 
services are widely available, and the convenience 
to both your business and your customers will easily 
outweigh the costs involved. 

You may be able to manage without using a 
merchant account—for example, by asking customers 
to pay via online transfers directly into your business 
bank account. However, merchant services not only 
offer the widest range of payment options, but they 
also help streamline your payment system, helping 
you provide refunds easily, as well as shouldering 
some of the risk of customers attempting to 
reverse transactions. 


How e-payment systems work 


With cash use on the decline, e-payment—making 
paperless transactions via an electronic medium—is fast 
becoming the main way of making purchases. In the 
seconds it takes for an e-payment, the customer's bank and 
your bank “talk” to one another through a payment 
gateway or processor. If the customer has enough funds, 


the transaction is approved, and payment usually follows 
later. You might also wish to accept cryptocurrency, such 
as Bitcoin by choosing a bitcoin payment processing 
provider (PSP) and opening a bitcoin account. Customers 
pay you from their bitcoin wallets, and bitcoins can be 
converted to your local currency after the sale. 


Authorization 
request sent 


The merchant service provider 
gathers the transaction data 
and sends a secure request via 
a payment gateway/processor 
for approval to pay the seller. 


"account informatio 2 
YE 


Request approved 
or declined 


The customer's bank 

approves the purchase if 

there is sufficient money in their 
account; otherwise, it declines. 


3 


Not everyone is happy making online purchases via 
websites, so if you can offer a range of payment 
methods, there is less chance of you losing sales. 


> Bank deposit The 
customer pays into your 
business account before 
the order is sent. 


> Wire transfer The 


customer wires money 
from their bank or 
brokerage account into 
your bank account. This 
may take up to 24 hours. 


> Check or money order 
The customer sends you 
a check or money order, 
which you deposit and 


purchase due to a lack of payment options 


then wait for the funds 
to clear. 


) Cashier's check The 
customer can obtain a 
cashier's check at a bank 
and send it to you to pay 
for the goods or services. 


> Cross-border payment 
platform This is a 
computer program 
shared with a partner 
organization that enables 
direct payments to be 
made between countries. 


Baymard Institute consumer survey, 2019 


fs Lf 1 


Ay 


ae 
itnorizatic 
PILLELL 


LLL L 
ib 


FIRST STEPS 
Taking Payments 


/| NEED TO KNOW 


> POS (point-of-sale) 
system is software that 
enables retailers to take 
customers’ payments, 
send invoices, and 
manage data and 
stock inventory. 


> PSP (payment services 
provider) is a payment 
gateway and a merchant 
service provider 
combined into one. 

> White-label platform 
refers to a ready-to-use 
computer program that 
automates the sales and 
payment system. 


) Acquiring bank is the 
seller's own bank, which 
receives funds from 
the customer's bank. 


> Digital wallet is any 
type of software that 
enables people to store 
their bank details in 
the cloud for making 
payments online. 
PayPal and GooglePay 
are examples. 


> Issuing bank denotes 
the customer's bank, 
which has issued the 
debit or credit card in 
the customer's name. 


72/73 "= 


Ys 
69 O of customers abandon a 


Y y 
” di |? ae fi E 


Uuumwtwbttttbtbttbtttttt 


Fulfilling Orders 


If your business sells and delivers products, it is vital to develop 
an efficient system for fulfilling customer orders. Customers will 
value your reliability, and your brand will inspire trust. 


Meeting expectations ensure that each part of the Initially, you might use multiple 
Over the past decade, advances process, from taking orders and spreadsheets to track incoming 

in managing orders from sale to packing goods to sending them out, orders and costs, to review and 
delivery have raised customer is as fast and efficient as possible. update inventory, and to set 
expectations of quick, convenient To facilitate this, make sure you delivery dates so customers know 
receipt of goods and their easy have sufficient stock, stored as when to expect their goods. As 
return. A positive experience at close to your premises as possible, your online orders grow, however, 
each stage strongly influences so that products can be easily you are likely to need order 
customers’ purchasing behavior, accessed, packed, and dispatched. fulfillment software to help you 

so a new retail venture needs to Keep careful records throughout. organize your systems—or you may 


Managing the process 


A basic fulfillment system should enable you to handle orders promptly, acknowledge 
receipt of them, keep a record of them manually or otherwise, and communicate with all 
parties involved—from the manufacturer to the customer. Keeping track of all your 
inventory (products and materials) is also crucial so that you have what is needed to meet 
demand. Coordinate each stage with the next one to ensure a smooth process. 


meee 


Take orders Manufacture or retrieve the product 

When a customer places an order, check whether Create the product or retrieve it from existing stock, 
the goods are in stock or when they will be available. simultaneously updating the inventory and creating 
When this is confirmed, send an email to the customer, or ordering more items to meet future demand. Then 
supplying them with an order number and indicating carefully package, label, and prepare the package 


an estimated delivery date. for dispatch. 


FIRST STEPS 
Fulfilling Orders 


74/75 


find it more efficient to outsource 
all, or part of, the process (see 
pp.50—51) to maintain a high 
standard of customer service. 
E-fulfillment companies help with 
online sales, handling everything 
from storage to dispatch. They can 
also tailor their services to your 
needs as a small business. If this 
seems like an attractive option, 
choose carefully, ensuring that 
the costs are manageable and 
that the company’s values, services, 
and operation are a good fit with 
your brand. 


Distribute or deliver the package 


Choose an appropriate delivery method. If the 
customer is local, you can hand-deliver the item; if 
not, send it by post or courier. Valuable items require 
an insured shipping method or can be covered by a 
goods-in-transit insurance policy. 


> Fulfillment management is 
the overseeing of the ordering 
process, from the initial sales 
inquiry to the delivery of the 
product to the customer. 


>) Warehouse inventory refers to 
all the goods and materials that 
will be for sale by the company. 


seecccesecessesces 


> E-fulfillment refers to the 
processes used by businesses to 
sell products or services online. 


t=, 60% 


of people buy 
from the online 
retailer with the 
best delivery 
options 


State of eCommerce Delivery Consumer 


See eR SORE IEN ES Research Report, MetaPack, 2017 


mye 


Notify customer 


Notify the customer when the package ships and, 

if required, contact them on the day of delivery to 
confirm location, time frame, and any special 
instructions. The package should include instructions 
on how to return the item, if necessary. 


Identifying Initial 
Costs 


You will need to spend money on items to get your business up and 
running. Give some thought to what you need now and what can wait, 
and balance the cost of the essential items against your available funds. 


Assessing your needs 

Each business has different setup needs so will 
require a shopping list depending on the industry, 
location, and business model. Identify the initial costs 
required for the basic setup of your business. These 
start-up purchases could be for assets, such as stock 
and equipment, or one-off expenses, such as acquiring 
a license and creating a website. Remember that once 


your business is up and running, you will also have INSURANCE, PERMITS, 
ongoing expenses (see pp.78-79). AND LICENSES 

It is not always necessary to buy everything; items Depending on your business, 
can be leased (see box, below), rented, or shared you may be legally required to 
with other businesses. Think, too, about buying hold insurance, permits, and 
reconditioned items, which can be cheaper and are licenses in order to operate. 


Seek advice to ensure your 
business is compliant. 


less wasteful for the environment (see pp.100-—101). 


Some assets essential to starting your business might 

be very expensive, such as premises, or be continually 
updated, such as equipment or software. When deciding 
what initial purchases you need to make, consider 
whether it would make sense to buy or lease. If you 
decide to buy an asset, you own and control it, but will 
have larger upfront costs and have to pay for ongoing 
maintenance. If you lease an asset, however, you rent 

it for a fixed time, spreading payments over regular 
intervals. You avoid a large initial outlay, and payments 


STOCK 


Raw materials and stock need to 
be bought and stored before 
you can sell. Buy the minimum 
amount of materials to meet 
sales forecasts in the business 
plan. This avoids spending too 
much on storage. 


may be tax deductible. Leasing is also appealing if there 
is a high risk of the asset becoming obsolete. However, if 
you intend to use an asset in the long term, it is generally 
more cost-effective to buy it than lease it. 


PREPARING PREMISES 


Whether it is an office or a shop, 
if your business requires 


premises you will need to make 
upfront payments. Some costs 
to expect include deposits and 
rent, health and safety checks, 
construction, and decorating. 


EQUIPMENT 


All businesses need equipment , 


whether it is machines to make 
coffee or scissors to cut hair. 
Make a list of your minimum 
requirements to see what your 
budget allows before spending 
on nonessentials. 


MARKETING AND 
BRANDING 


You will need to design a brand 
and a marketing strategy. 


Anticipate the costs of hiring 
a graphic designer to create a 
logo and any promotion for 
the launch of your business. 


FIRST STEPS 
Identifying Initial Costs 


76/77 WE 


UTILITIES 


Getting your premises 
connected to telecoms, 
electricity, and water is vital. 
Many utility providers offer 
discounted deals for rates and 
installations to business users, so 
shop around before committing. 


TECHNOLOGY AND IT 


In addition to computers and 
software, you may also need 
technology and IT support 
specific to your type of business. 
This can involve a significant 
investment, so consider buying 
refurbished kit or leasing. 


WEBSITE 


You will need to lease your 
website's domain name and its 
web-hosting service. You may 
also want to commision a web 
designer. Secure your website 
and the privacy of its vistors by 
including online cybersecurity. 


How Much Do You 
Need to Spend? 


Figuring out your start-up costs can be overwhelming. Take 
a systematic approach and divide your expenditures by category 
to calculate what you do—and do not—need to spend on. 


Identifying potential costs 

Accurately calculating exactly how much money you 
need to spend in order to get your business up and 
running is a critical step. It will help you assess 
whether you will be able to survive the first few 
months of operation and will give you a clearer idea of 
whether you might need to raise additional funds. It is 
useful to think about your start-up costs as falling into 


Estimating start-up costs 


Create a spreadsheet so you can see at a glance the three 
main types of spending you will incur when you start 
operating. In the first column, note business assets, such 
as those shown here, and their cost plus the cash in the 
bank you need to get started. In the second, itemize 
initial expenses, such as branding or legal work. Add all 
these costs together to give you the amount you need to 
spend to get your business to the point of launch. In the 
third column, list regular ongoing expenses. 


If your finances are limited, be realistic, and prune your 

start-up costs to the bare minimum. For example: 

> Upgrade your computer, rather than replace it, and 
borrow other items from friends and family. 

> Buy office furniture and equipment from auction sites, 
secondhand stores, specialty resellers, and bankruptcy 
sales, or lease special equipment initially. 


> Create your own website using a low-cost website 
building service, and publicize your business yourself 
on social media platforms using smartphone images. 


> Use a fixed-cost contractor for tasks that require 
expertise instead of taking on employees. 


three separate categories: assets, initial costs, and 
regular ongoing costs. You will then need to compare 
these three categories with your estimated monthly 
revenue for the first year. The comparison will give 
you a realistic idea of your business's financial health, 
alerting you to potential peaks and troughs throughout 
the year and showing when you are likely to break 
even and then start making a profit. 


BUSINESS ASSETS 


Equipment and items of value that your 
business owns. These can be tangible, such as 
a computer, or intangible, such as a patent. 


Stock/inventory 


Items required for retail, 
hospitality, wholesale, or 
manufacturing ventures 


IT equipment 


Technology such as desktop 
computers, laptops, and 
cell phones 


Office furniture 


Ergonomic desks and office 
chairs to support staff well-being 


Vehicles 


Any mode of transportation 
required for delivery or 
business travel 


Prioritizing your needs 

When assessing how much you need to spend, 
consider your assets first—the essential items and 
equipment you need to run your business. There will 
also be other one-off costs (see examples below). In 
addition, you will have ongoing expenses payable 
monthly, quarterly, or annually. For each itemized cost, 
ask yourself whether you really must incur it, and focus 
your spending on what is vital to run the business 
right now. Research the cheapest ways to get what you 
need, such as buying assets secondhand or renting, 
rather than purchasing, equipment (see box opposite). 


INITIAL ONE-OFF COSTS 


One-off costs that will be required to 
prepare your business to start operating. 


Unlike assets, they will be tax deductible LTT 


against income. 


Premises (preparation) 


Installing networks, health and 
safety, painting and decorating 


Website (design and setup) 


Creating and setting up your 
website, including security 


Branding 


Graphic design to create your 
logo and brand appearance 


Advertising/marketing 


Getting the message out about 
your business launch and product 


Legal work 
Applying for permits and licenses; 
getting advice on contracts 


FIRST STEPS Uf Q / 79 ))) 
How Much Do You Need to Spend? 


REGULAR ONGOING EXPENSES 


Regularly recurring costs that your business 
will face once it starts operating. Also tax 
deductible against income. 


Utilities 
Payable for usage of electricity, 
water, internet, and phone usage 


IT maintenance 


Specialist help for managing 
and updating software, your 
website, and network security 


Raw materials 


Creating a product will require 
raw materials to be replaced 


Consumables 


Items that get used up such 
as stationery, printer ink, 
and toilet paper 


Repayment of loans 


Any amounts of capital and/or 
interest paid to lenders for debt 


Wages 


Usually paid monthly for 
any staff on the payroll 


Contractor payments 


For others who provide services 
ona temporary basis 


Advertising/marketing 


For regular paid promotions 
such as pay-per-click 


DOWMOSOH® 


How Much Do You 
Need to Earn? 


Every enterprise needs to be financially viable, as most owners will expect to earn 
a living from it. When starting out, you will need to calculate your business costs 
as well as your living costs to figure out your expected earnings. 


Estimating your income 


As a business owner, you can draw a salary like an 
employee, but you may also take regular sums known 
as dividends. The business must generate enough 


money to pay for all day-to-day running 
costs, such as rent or stock replacement. 
However, you will also need to put aside 
extra money for unexpected (contingency) 
costs and for financing growth. It is, 
therefore, vital to calculate how much money, 
after expenses, your business is realistically 
capable of producing. In other words, when 
will it start to make enough money to give 
you an income that you can live on? 


Income versus investment 

There is a balance between taking money 
out of your business and retaining it to 
invest in future growth. In the early stages, 
your business is unlikely to make money 

as you may have only a few customers or 
clients. It is not unusual for owners to take 
only a small income or none at all. This may 
have to continue for some time to ensure 
your company has sufficient funds to remain 
stable and to invest for the long term. 


Figuring it out 


To calculate the viability of a business idea, 
you need to compare how much money it 

will generate against how much you need to 
earn. From this, you will get an estimate to use 
as a guide, because the company is not yet 
operating. You should be prepared to earn less 
at first in order for the business to survive. 


However, it is important that your business can deliver 
a realistic income within a reasonable length of time. 
Figure out these calculations so that you can add them 


to your business plan (see pp.104—105). 


POTENTIAL MONEY IN THE BUSINESS 


First, make a realistic estimate of how much the business may 
earn over a period of 6-12 months. Then deduct all expenses, 


including investment and contingency costs. 


INVESTMENT AND 
CONTINGENCY 


COSTS 


New or replacement 


equipment 


START-UP COSTS RUNNING COSTS 
(which will 
eventually be 
repaid) 
Premises Staff costs 
Stock Rent/mortgage 
Machines Consumables and 
y stock replenishment 
Webs Utilities (broadband, 


gas, electricity) 


Product or service 
development 


Market research 


Unforeseen 
emergencies 


Calculate the amount of money that you will have to pay 
in taxes (see pp.90-91) and add this figure to your costs. 
The amount of money left after all deductions have been 


made is available for you as a salary or dividend. 


FIRST STEPS Q @ / Q il ))) 
How Much Do You Need to Earn? 


your money 


» Revenue is the total amount of > Retained earnings is money kept 
befo re you have money taken by a business over in the business to support growth. 
“i a specified period of time. > Dividends are earnings from the 
earn ed it. > Profit is the amount of money company that are paid to owners 
; remaining after expenses/payables or shareholders (typically annually) 
Thomas Jefferson, 3rd US president have been paid. in the form of cash or shares. 


YOUR REQUIRED INCOME 


Figuring out what you need to earn is similar to determining 
what the business requires in terms of costs. Personal spending 
usually falls into the following categories: 


ea | 
Se eceten Groceries Transportation Clothing ca (a) f 
HOUSING Rees Insurance Maintenance (45 (33 cs f 
UTILITIES Electricity Water Telephone es C2) (3 
EXISTING DEBT Personal loan Credit card ae) Ls} 
ENTERTAINMENT Vacations Eating out Subscriptions 
SAVINGS Pension Emergency fund 


Estimate how much you typically spend, and consider where 
savings can be made. Be realistic about how much you have to 
spend, rather than how much you currently do. Many banks 
have online forms that can help you itemize your expenses. 


Funding Your 
Business 


The biggest challenge facing you as an entrepreneur might be sourcing 
enough money to start your business. Be aware of the different types of 
funding that are potentially available to you. 


Understanding funding 
The simplest way to fund your new 
business is through your personal 
income or savings. You can then 
rely on cash from your first sales to 
develop the business further. This 


Assessing 
your options 


Choosing a funding route will depend 
on your personal circumstances as 
well as the wider economic situation. 
For example, bootstrapping may work 
if your business is ideas-based with 
few overheads. You may feel taking on 
debt is a viable option if interest rates 
on borrowing are particularly low, 
while if you are skilled in social media, 
crowdfunding may work. Equity 
funding avoids debt, but the 
expectations of investors will bea 
different pressure. 


of st 


f 
| r 
aera. i] 


art-u p Sa 


iti 


ersonal savings 


Smallbiztrends.com, 2019 


approach is called “bootstrapping,” 
and it typically suits businesses 
with low start-up costs. 

If you lack savings, or if your early 
sales are unlikely to be sufficient to 
support the business, then you will 


Bootstrapping 


need external funding. Taking on 
debt is one option. Debt takes many 
forms, such as bank loans, business 
credit cards (see box, right), and 
asset financing (borrowing on the 
basis of your company assets), but 


This means funding the business from your own savings 


or income with little or no outside help. 


» No debt means no repayments and 
thus no liability if income falters. 

) Good for business-to-business 
(B2B) enterprises, for example, if 
you offer services or technology. 

» Suits web-based businesses and 
those where staff work remotely. 


Debt 


de 


p cont 


> Requires creativity and tenacity 
to build a business with low funds. 

» You need skills to negotiate long 
payment terms with suppliers. 

> Nota practical option if you need 
large sums, such as to fund premises 
or to pay staff to work on site. 


FIRST STEPS 


rmangvoursisnes OL/03 Dl 


but in each case the money you 
owe must be paid back regularly 
over an agreed period of time. You 
might be eligible for a grant (see 
p.85), or you might consider equity 
financing, whereby investors put 
money into your venture in return 
for a share of your business. 


Meeting obligations 
Before getting into any financing 
agreement, read all the terms 
carefully. They will set out strict 
conditions on payment times and 


Crowdfunding 


Vy 
“ny | 


Equity 


>» Removes the burden of debt and 
eases financial worries. 

> You benefit from the expertise 
of experienced business developers. 

> Investors can help build your 
business through their networks. 


amounts and specify whether the 
interest rate is fixed or fluctuates. 
There may be penalties for missed 
payments, perhaps also for early 
repayment of the full sum. Discuss 
how you will meet your financial 
obligations with an accountant. 
Remember, if you provide security 
to the lender, such as your house, 
you risk losing this if you default on 
the debt. An equity agreement 
avoids debt but comes with the 
“cost” of giving up some control 
over your business to investors. 


This depends on investors providing funds in return 
for ashare in the profits or control of your business. 


> Likely to be time-consuming to 
find the right investors. 

> Investors share profits and may 
want a return in less than five years. 

> You may lose some control over 
the running of your business. 


A business credit card is a form of 
debt, but it can help you manage 
your cash flow. Before settling on 

a credit card provider, make sure 
you compare a range of different 
cards aimed specifically at new 
businesses. Look for cards that 
offer management tools, such as 
the separation of business and 
personal expenses and the option 
of obtaining extra cards on the 
account for your employees to use. 
A low-rate card is the best choice 
for paying back large expenses over 
time. However, you often need a 
good credit rating to be accepted 
for low-rate cards, and the lender 
may not offer cash back or other 
rewards that may appeal. 


0 BE AWARE 


> Beas accurate as possible 
with your cash flow projections 
when applying for funding so that 
you can be sure you will be able 
to meet your obligations. 


> Make sure there is enough 
cash in your current account 
to meet monthly repayments 
if you are borrowing. 

> Agree on a strategic date 
with your lender(s) when money 
will leave your account. 

> Schedule repayment dates so 
that cash flows into your business 
account before money is due to 
be repaid. 


Who Might Invest? 


There are many types of investors who can help to finance your venture. 
You need to understand the implications of accepting each kind of 
investment, from making repayments to giving up a share of your profits. 


How funding works 

Any person, group, or organization 
willing to invest in your start-up 
can do so in one of two ways: by 
lending money to your business at 
a particular rate of interest, or by 
giving you a lump sum in return for 
shares in your new enterprise. 

Many people, when considering 
loan investments, wrongly think 
that banks are the only potential 
lenders. In fact, anyone is legally 
allowed to lend you money so long 
as the loan is covered by a formal 
contractual agreement that sets out 
the amount being borrowed, the 
duration of the loan, the interest 
rate charged, and how much will 
be repaid each month. 

The other funding option for a 
small business is called an equity 
investment—putting money into 
your venture in exchange for a say 
in the running of the business and 
a portion of its future profits. Once 


Types of investors 


Traditionally, small businesses were 
funded primarily by banks or perhaps 
wealthy relatives, but today the ranks 
of investors run from individuals with 
spare cash to groups of professional 
investors who specialize in funding 
start-ups with good growth prospects. 
Many countries have government 
agencies that assist new ventures via 
direct funding, providing grants, or 
linking them with potential investors. 


again, financial institutions will 
not be the only ones attracted (or 
allowed) to put money into your 
business. Friends, family members, 
and business contacts are just 


> May offer useful advice and 
expertise as well as funding 

> More likely to offer preferential 
interest rates on loans 

> May be flexible on repayment 
plans and dates 


Peer-to-peer 


> Peers have a personal interest in 
helping you succeed 

> Peers will understand the business 
environment of your start-up 

> Interest rates offered by peers are 
usually better than bank rates 


Crowdfunding 


> Wide pool of potential investors 
can be targeted online 

> Can raise money quickly, and you 
control the terms of the funding 

> Funding appeal might go viral 
and raise more cash than expected 


Family and friends 


People close to you may be willing to assist, but funding by 
family and friends requires careful management. 


some of the potential investors who 
may want to help you get up and 
running and at the same time be 
rewarded by a share of profits in 
the form of annual dividends. 


> Risk of damaging relationships 
if things go wrong 

> Discussing money arrangements 
may be awkward 

> Additional pressure for the 
business to succeed 


Potential investors range from business colleagues and staff 
members to individuals on peer-to-peer (P2P) lending sites. 


> Risk of losing your reputation 
should your business fail 

» Disagreements with peers over 
how to run the business 

> Your credit rating may suffer if 
you apply via a P2P site 


Through crowdfunding, you can reach a global audience for 
either a loan or a stake in the business. 


>» May be more demanding, since 
funders do not know you personally 

> You must reimburse investors if 
you fail to reach your funding target 

> Fierce online competition for 
investors’ funding 


FIRST STEPS 
Who Might Invest? 


84/85 DE 


Banks 


While not usually equity investors, banks will still assess the 
stability and growth potential of your business before lending. 


> May require a guarantor or 
security against the loan 

> You need an excellent credit 
rating for the best interest rates 

> You need to provide evidence of 
your ability to repay from revenue 


> Simple debt agreement with no 
say in business operations 

> You maintain independence in 
running your business 

» Banks adhere to government- 
imposed financial regulations 


= Business angels 
e A wealthy private investor who puts money into a start-up in 
return for a stake in the business. 
PROS CONS 


> Can provide mentoring and bring 
valuable experience 

> Will make quick decisions and 
have cash available 

> May enhance growth potential 
with their vision and contacts 


> May wield more control than you 
feel comfortable with 


> You are giving away a percentage 
of your future earnings 


> High expectations about your 
performance and the rate of return 


e Venture capitalists 


ti Professionals who manage pooled funds for investors seeking 
a return from funding new business growth. 
PROS CONS 


> You do not have to repay the > When you sell the business, your 


In most countries, two types of 
programs—accelerators and 
incubators—exist to support 
businesses at the start-up stage. 
Joining either type can encourage 
lenders to invest in your business. 


> Accelerators are like intensive 
study courses, and they are either 
privately run or publicly funded. 
Start-up owners apply to join and, 
if selected, enter for a fixed term, 
usually 3 to 6 months. During this 
period, the owner receives a 


concentrated, rapid education on 
how to grow their business under 
the guidance of mentors. Private 
accelerator programs may also 
offer to invest in your business. 


> Incubators are less intensive but 
still provide education and tactical 
mentorship. These programs are 
usually funded by a university or 
an economic development 
organization. With a focus on 
innovation, incubators typically 
run for a year or more and aim to 
provide an environment in which 
an entrepreneur can hone their 
business model. 


money (as with business angels) 
> Can give leadership and also 
advise on day-to-day management 
> Provides opportunities for 
collaborating with experts 


share will be less 
> Board of directors required, as 
well as frequent financial reporting 
> Risk of losing your business if it 
fails to perform well enough 


Government, local authorities, and charities 


National and local government bodies, as well as some 
charities, may award grants to new ventures (see pp.212-215). 


> Grants are essentially free and 
do not need to be repaid 

> Generally easy to access, with 
plenty of information online 

> Helps build credibility and 
promote your business 


> Often time-consuming to go 
through the application process 

> Plenty of competition from other 
businesses for funding 

> Restrictions and conditions on 
how you spend the money 


are 


employees 


We made sure 
to 
that 


Biz Stone, co-founder, Twitter 


Pitching for 
Investment 


If you need to borrow to finance your start-up, you will have to 
persuade funders that your business is a good investment. Thorough 
preparation is key; be enthusiastic but also honest and realistic. 


Preparing to pitch 

Once you have identified potential investors, you will 
need to create a presentation—or pitch—to persuade 
them to back your business. 

Research your potential investors’ interests and 
current investments, and see if they match your plans. 
Make sure you can describe every aspect of your 
business, including your customers and competitors. 
You will also need to show a detailed grasp of finances, 
so have financial projections to hand, including 
expected turnover and profits in the short to long term. 

Start your pitch with a short, engaging summary of 
what makes you and your business stand out from the 
crowd. This is known as an “elevator pitch”— 
deliverable in the time it takes to ride in a lift. Then 
describe what the business provides, highlighting the 
problem it aims to solve or customer wish it can fulfil, 
before moving on to your service or product solution. 

The detail should follow. Outline the marketplace, 
competition, customers, operations, others involved in 
the business, and finances, using high quality visuals, 
such as product examples, artwork, or digital 
presentations. Finally, set out what funds are needed 
and their exact purpose. Be sure to practise your pitch 
to get constructive feedback. 


Online presentations 

Pitching over a video-conferencing platform, such as 
Zoom or Google Hangouts, poses particular challenges. 
Practice your pitch using the platform's various 
functions and prepare for technical issues, such as 
losing connection while presenting—perhaps by 
having a colleague ready to take over. You are not in 
control of your audience’s environment, which may be 
filled with distractions, so get to the point quickly. 
Since it is harder to read the room, make your 
presentation more discussion-based, asking questions 
and engaging, but allow for time delays and the 
possibility of talking over each other. 


Presenting the pitch 


Investors are likely to judge a business at 
least partly by the person making the 
presentation. Aim to appear confident 
but not arrogant, and professional 
without being inflexible and unwilling to 
listen. Build a rapport by introducing 
yourself clearly, making eye contact (or 
looking into the camera if online), and 
delivering a strong statement of why 
your business exists and why customers 
will buy its products or use its services. 
Watch the audience to ensure they are 
still engaged, and note points that raise 
particular interest as these may appear 
in later questions. Keep in mind the 
three key questions below, which may 
decide future investment. End witha 
statement of what you are looking for 
and establish what the next steps will be. 
It is usual to send a follow-up email a 
few days after a pitch. 


Pitching for Investment 8 6 8 7 


our ideas, the 
audience must first 


Peter Coughter, The Art of the Pitch, 2012 


i = Z| = —=—| 

DO... DON'T... 

> Keep it short and to the > Be unrealistic about 
point, and make your first financial projections. 
SONGS SGN IN ) Focus too much on 

> Invite the audience to technical detail or jargon. 
ask questions, and listen > Assume your audience 
to them carefully. will share your enthusiasm 

> Make sure you have (you must persuade them) 
evidence for claims (such ) Talk too much about 
as market research). yourself—focus on 

> Show enthusiasm for the business. 
and belief in your ideas; > Read directly froma 
demonstrate motivation. screen or turn your back 

) Stay relaxed—head up, on the audience if 
with good posture. presenting in person. 

> Speak at a steady pace, > Fidget—this can be 
especially at the start of distracting. 
your pitch. > Overload visuals with 

) Use powerful images to words, bullet points, and 
back up the messages in complicated graphics. 
the presentation. 

10) Wats 
£ 
£ £. f £ 
Who will buy? What about the 


You must show there 
is sufficient demand 
and the business can 
actually meet that 
demand. Otherwise, 
investment could be 
too risky. 


NA WA 


competitors? 
Your business needs 
to either create a 
new market or beat 
its rivals to provide 
a realistic return on 
investment. 


VIEWS 


Balancing the Books 


To keep track of your business finances, you need a proper system in place. 
Balancing the books—or balancing the figures—is a method of ensuring that 
all monies entering and leaving the business are accounted for. 


Keeping a record 


Balancing the books—bringing the totals of debits 


and credits into agreement—is the basis of business 
accounting. Businesses typically balance their figures 


at month end using double-entry bookkeeping (see 


below). This records every transaction as both a debit 
and a credit, making it easier to spot errors and helping about your transactions and to generate essential 
to protect your business against fraud, whether from 


customers or clients, suppliers, or employees. 


Managing your business accounts is vital, but if 


you are not confident, you could hire an accountant 
to do the work for you. Or learn how to do it yourself. 


How double-entry 
bookkeeping works 


As the name implies, double-entry involves 
recording every transaction twice. A double- 
entry spreadsheet or ledger will have a debit 
column and credit column for each transaction, 
showing how one form of asset—cash—has been 
exchanged for another form of asset, such as 
stock for resale, a piece of equipment, or raw 
materials. Thus, all the cash you spend as part of 
the business over a set period is replaced by an 
asset or service you have bought. For example, 
if you buy $200 worth of stock on credit, add 
this amount to the debit column as inventory 
and in the credit column as accounts payable. 
Repeat this for every purchase made, daily or 
weekly, throughout the accounting period. 


The traditional way to record business transactions 
is to write them down in a ledger book and calculate 
the figures manually (see below). Alternatively, you 
can also use spreadsheets and simple accounting 
software, which is widely available. This allows you 
to easily record, store, sort, and retrieve information 


documents, such as sales invoices and financial 
reports. It can also highlight unbalanced transactions 
in your records as well as calculate totals. However, 


make sure the software you use is up-to-date so that 
it is in line with current tax rules and requirements. 


INVENTORY 
(ASSETS ACCOUNT) $200 


ACCOUNTS PAYABLE 
(UABILITIESACCOUNT) =—<“<its‘<iSC‘«:‘«X SLO 


TOTAL $200 $200 


FIRST STEPS 
Balancing the Books 


88/89 IE 


Financial reports 

Creating an effective bookkeeping system allows 

you to produce financial reports to help monitor the 
financial health of your business, such as a balance 
sheet (see box, below right). Prepare a profit and loss 
statement, also known as an income statement, to 
assess how profitable your business has been over 

a specific period—comparing revenues with expenses. 
Create a statement of cash flow (see pp.160-161) to 
show how money is moving through the business 

and your ability to pay its bills. Use these reports to 
help you make informed business decisions, such 

as setting budgets, assessing costs, and measuring 
business performance. Study them closely, looking for 
potential irregularities and problems as soon as they 
occur in order to prevent them from developing further. 


Debits 


Debits record all monies flowing into 
your business. Although the stock 
has yet to be sold, the debit entered 
represents the value of the extra 
stock that you have purchased. 


Credits 


Credits record all monies flowing out 
of your business. Although you have 
not yet paid for the stock, they will 
have to be paid for in the future, so 
they are entered as a credit. 


Balanced total 


Totals record the sum amounts of 
both the credit and debit columns, 
which should match or “balance.” 

If the totals do not match, check the 
entries in both columns for errors. 


KA NEED TO KNOW 


> Assets are the cash and resources owned by the 
business, including equipment and stock. It also 
includes accounts receivable, which are sales that 
have been made for which money is outstanding. 

> Liabilities are the business debts, such as bank loans 
and accounts payable—money owed by the business. 

» Equity is what is left after the total value of business 
liabilities is deducted from the total value of your assets. 

> Income is your revenue—the money you receive 
from sales of goods or services, or from investments 
and dividends. 

> Expenditure is the money you pay out for goods, 
materials, services, salaries, rent, utilities, etc. 


Provided that your bookkeeping is correct, the assets 
on your balance sheet should equal the sum of your 
liabilities and equity. A balance sheet is like a health 
check for your business. If liabilities are proportionately 
low and equity high, you will be in a better position 

to expand—or weather downturns in the economy. 


ASSETS 
$1,000 


LIABILITIES 
$400 


language of business... 
pays off big later on.” 


Warren Buffet, CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, 2014 


Understanding 
Business Taxes 


All businesses are required to pay tax. Understanding business taxes 
will ensure you pay the right amount at the right time. It will also help 
you to set aside enough money to meet your tax obligations. 


Paying your taxes 
As a business owner, you will be 
responsible for paying tax on 
profits. How much your business 
pays depends on how much profit 
you make, and the percentage of 
tax you pay on that profit depends 
on how you choose to structure 
your business—as a sole entity 
(or sole proprietor), a partnership, 
or a company (see pp.26—27). Each 
of these legal structures has tax 
advantages and disadvantages, 
so thoroughly research which one 
gives you the most favorable rate 
of tax for your expected earnings. 
In your first year, as you set up 
your business, you will usually 
have high expenses. However, 
these expenses can be deducted 
from your income, leaving you with 
a lower tax bill at the end of the 


year. This is difficult to predict, 
so it is important to monitor 
monthly profitability consistently 
(see pp.88-—89) and set aside 
enough cash each month to pay 
your annual tax bill. You can 
complete your own tax return, but 
many business owners choose to 
appoint an accountant, who will 
advise on how to maximize any 
deductions you can claim. 


government 
can exist 


Frederick the Great 


7, NEED TO KNOW 


> Capital gains tax (CGT) is a tax 


on profits from selling capital 
assets such as land, buildings, 
stocks, and shares. Small 
businesses may be considered 
exempt or able to apply for 
discounted rates. 


> Tax threshold is the amount that 


you or your business can earn 
before tax is payable, or before 
paying a higher rate of tax. A 
threshold of $10,000 means 
that no tax is due on profits or 
income below that amount. 


> Dividend is money paid by a 


company to shareholders from 
profit. Dividends are usually taxed 
at a lower rate than salary. 


Calculating tax 


Regardless of whether you have 

a company or operate as a sole 
proprietor or partnership, you will 
need to register to pay taxes and 
complete a tax return each year. On 
the return, you or your accountant 
have to show your income and then 
subtract expenses to find gross profit 
on which taxes will be calculated. 


Revenue 


Also called “turnover,” | 

_ this is the total amount 
of money your business — 
receives from its 
customers in payment 
for its products 

and services. 


Expenses 


These are the costs 
incurred by running your 
business—such as rent, 
wages, raw materials, 
and stationery. Investing 
in your business also 
counts as an expense. 


FIRST STEPS 


Understanding Business Taxes 9 @ ri Q 1 


COMMON TYPES OF TAXES 


Business owners may have to pay many different types of 
taxes, depending on the nature of their business and the 


_ Sales taxes 


~ MY 
MME unt GML / 
YU LULU le Melgela 


IE: YE Uy 
LD Ye 

une gpg 
Wp VY ae i The ao YA 


WMC. vemmen 


Li 


AN 
y 


Income taxes 
Sole proprietors or individuals in a 
partnership will pay tax on profits 
IK made through their business activities 
as though they were employees. If you 
are a director or employee of your 
company and are paid dividends or 
wages from the company, you will pay tax on these 
personal earnings, which are treated separately 
from company tax. 


Gross profit | Tax 
This is the amount of 
money that remains 
after expenses and 
taxes have been 
deducted. Investing — 
in the business 
increases expenses 
and therefore reduces 
gross profit. 


This must be paid 
according to the tax 
system of the country 
in which the business 
is registered. Paying 
tax remains a legal 
requirement in most 
countries. 


country in which it is registered (see pp.212-215). The most 
common types of taxes include the following: 


Company taxes 


SB 


SOK 


ys turn, mora rota Wy 
: ES wll van ry dep 


ee 


te payments sual incr a ena 


ded to tal 


YoY 
tena afta ye 


Yes 


a. | 


d 


Other taxes 
It is common for taxes to be levied 
by local authorities and jurisdictions, 
lif even at city level. For example, in the 
US, businesses with commercial or 
industrial premises pay business rates 
to their local authority, in addition 
to tax paid to the federal government. Small businesses 
can often claim a discount or relief on business rates, 
especially if profits are below a certain threshold. 


Net profit 


This is the amount of 

profit left after taxes have 
been paid. This amount is — 
available for the business 
or for the owner in the 
form of a dividend. 


Setting Up a 
Business Account 


Setting up a dedicated bank account for your business is not always 
essential. However, it can be a sensible step, granting you access 
to useful banking services available only to business owners. 


Understanding the benefits 

Depending on your business type (see pp.32-33), 

you may be required to set up a business bank 
account that separates business finances from your 
own. A business account can offer advantages. 
Importantly, it allows you to clearly see how much 
money the business has available at any time and 
when payments have been made or received. Plus it 
makes it easier to manage regular business expenses, 
such as software, utilities, or travel costs. A dedicated 
account means that your business can collect 


FINTECH 


> Fintech (financial technology) 
developed as banking became 
increasingly digitalized. It provides 
services such as mobile payments. 


> Utilizing the technology available 
on your smartphone, fintech has 
fewer overheads and offers 
cheaper options. 


> In regions such as Africa, Asia, 
and India, where traditional banks 
can leave many smaller businesses at 
a disadvantage, fintech offers access 
to affordable payment services. 


> Start-up businesses can use fintech 
to access finance from crowdfunding 
platforms rather than from 
traditional banks. 


payments made by credit or debit cards as well as 
online, which customers may expect. You can also 
exchange foreign currencies more easily. An account 
allows your business to build up a credit history, 
which may help you raise finance in the future. 


Considering options 

As well as traditional banks, there are also financial 
technology (“fintech”) organizations (see below left) 
that provide a range of automated financial services. 
However, your choice will depend on many factors, 
such as whether your business makes mainly online 
consumer transactions, transactions with other 
businesses, or transactions in different currencies. 


value 
worldwide mobile 
payment 


Mobile payment outlook 2023, Alliedmarketresearch.com, 2020 


Choosing and opening 
an account 


When you set up a business account, you will need to 
provide documentation to prove who you are as well 

as details of the business. You need to be sure that the 
account meets your needs now and will continue to do 

so in the future. You need to consider the different services, 
products, and resources each account provider offers. 
Before committing yourself, ask these questions (see right): 


FIRST STEPS 
Setting Up a Business Account 


QUESTIONS TO ASK BEFORE YOU 
OPEN AN ACCOUNT 


How easy is it to open an account? 


It can take four weeks to open a business 
current account. Consider a savings 
account, if appropriate for your business. 


Is there an introductory offer? 


If there is an offer such as a free banking 
period, balance this against future 
monthly charges. 


What are the monthly charges? 


Typically, these are payable monthly. 
Check also whether a minimum balance 
is required. 


What are the transaction charges? 
q Find out what the bank charges are for 


paying money in and out as well as 
for mobile and online transactions. 


PROVIDING DOCUMENTATION 


To comply with banking regulations, including those to 
protect against money laundering, you will need to 
provide the following documents to open an account in 
most countries: 


Proof of identity such as a passport or identity card. 


Is there a relationship manager? 


This person works with you on your 
accounts. Be sure you can contact them 
easily (face-to-face, phone, email). 


E> E> 


Does the bank provide advice? 


Find out whether the bank offers advice 
and market expertise, for example, 
network events or investment advice. 


Is it easy to get an overdraft? 


Ask about overdrafts and the terms or 
charges involved. See whether there are 
any short-term or quick lending options. 


How soon are deposits processed? 
o Find out how long it takes to process 

deposits, both large and small. This is 

important for business cash flow. 


Proof of address—a utility bill, for example. 


Business details, which could be supplied in the form 
of company registration documents from the relevant 
national institution, or legal documents, such as 
Articles of Incorporation. 


92/93 IE 


YY ‘ 
Protecting JE L 
Your Business yy 


All business ventures involve an element of risk. Identifying 
key risks in advance and figuring out how to guard against 
them will increase your start-up’s chances of success. 


Assessing risks 

To effectively plan for risks, you must first identify 
them. One way to do this is to carry out a simple 
risk assessment. This involves noting potential 
risks, from threats to your intellectual property 
(see pp.96—97) to employee accidents and fire 
damage, then evaluating how severely these risks 
would impact on your business and how likely they 
are to occur. You might find it helpful to create a 
chart (see top, right). 

Your assessment of a risk’s likelihood should take 
into account past performances and also encompass 
possible future events. Make a plan of action for each 
weighted risk, and decide whether you intend to 
avoid, minimize, or accept it. 

You might seek to avoid a risk by changing a 
supplier or minimize a threat by altering a process. 
Where the risk seems small, you might choose to 
accept it, but monitor it. Another option is to guard 
against risks by transferring them to a third party, 
such as an insurance company (see below). 


Types of business insurance 


A start-up’s insurance requirements will depend on the 
type of work you undertake, where the business is based, 
and what risks are involved. Identify your immediate 
insurance needs initially, then regularly review the situation 
as the business develops, adding extra coverage as 
appropriate. There are several key insurance products that 
you might consider for your new business; depending on 
the country you are operating from and the nature of your 
business, some may be mandatory (see pp.212-215). 


FIRST STEPS e) 4 fs e) 5 yy) 
Protecting Your Business 


Once you have conducted a risk assessment, a good 
way to visually display your results is to create a risk 
impact/probability chart. The chart has two axes: 
one to show the likelihood (probability) that risks 
will become a reality, and one to show the severity 
of their impact if they do. Assign each of your risks 
a score for both probability and severity, then plot 
them between the axes. Prioritize risks that fall in 
the top-right (red) corner; those in the bottom left 
(green) corner will require less immediate attention. 


PROBABILITY 


Y 
YW 
mo 


SEVERITY OF IMPACT 


You should also safeguard your business by 
ensuring that you have the relevant legal 
documentation. Some activities—from exporting 
goods to selling food—may require a license or 
permit from the national or local government, 
or other affiliated body (see pp.212-215). Failure 
to comply with legal obligations may result in 
fines or even prosecution. 


Protecting Your 
Intellectual Property 


Your intellectual property (IP), which you have created in your mind, can range 
from original ideas to inventions. It is vital to protect your IP in order to stop 
competitors from copying or stealing it. 


Keeping ideas safe 

Exactly what counts as intellectual 
property varies from country to 
country (see pp.212—215), although 
it typically includes product 
inventions, artistic works, pieces of 
fiction, commercial images (such as 
photographs or illustrations), and 
brand names. 

The type of protection available 
to you will depend on the nature of 
the work. Some works are 
automatically granted protection— 
for example, copyright for literary 


\ 


/ 


\ 


works and sound recordings. Some 
protections, such as trademarks 
and patents (see below), you will 
need to apply for. The relevant body 
in your country will handle these 
applications. Take care that your 
idea does not infringe on another’s 
IP, particularly where other people’s 
ideas have inspired you. 

Consider the type of protection 
best suited to your needs. Single 
patents protect rights only in 
individual countries, so you may 
need to take out more than one. 


/ 


Types of IP 


An invention or idea is the basis of 
your success, and protecting this 
intellectual property could determine 
your long-term profitability. 
Businesses of any size, and individuals, 
can use IP protection. There are five 
main types of intellectual property: 
patents, trademarks, copyright, 
registered designs, and trade secrets. 
Depending on the specific IP, more 
than one type of protection might 

be necessary. 


Trademarks 


Mainly used to protect brand 
names and logos, trademarks 
are registered in categories of 
goods and services called 
classes. After registering, you 
can use the ® symbol, which 
shows permission is needed 


to use your logo or name. ; 


FIRST STEPS fe) 6 / fe) Ay yy) 
Protecting Your Intellectual Property 


Copyright 
An automatic protection, this 
does not need to be 
registered. It protects original 
work involving skill, labor, or 
judgment, including books, 
visual arts, music, dramatic 
works, and software. 


Patents 
These apply to inventions that 
are new, involve a unique step, 
and can be used or made; they 

give the right to take legal 
action against those making, 
using, or selling without 

permission. 


Trade secrets 
Confidential information that 
gives a competitive edge 
needs protecting. A new 
business should have policies 
to ensure confidentiality; 
legal protection depends on 
local competition law. 


Registered designs 
These cover a product's 
external design or shape, such 
as visual representation and 
visually designed characters, 
and are useful for immediate 
protection. For extra security, 
you might use a registered 
design and a patent. 


Staying Safe in 
the Workplace 


As the owner of a business, you have a legal responsibility to protect staff, 
customers, and clients from harm. Proper safety procedures will help your 
operations run smoothly, avoiding accidents and injuries. 


Creating a safe work space or contractors may visit, to a retail location or a 

It is vital to protect your staff and visitors while they manufacturing facility—need to meet basic obligations 
are in the workplace. Check with government and local in order to keep workers and visitors safe. Carry out 
authorities for the legal safety requirements applicable risk assessments and act on any issues that arise, 

to your workplace (see pp.212—215). A hairdresser, for instruct staff on safety procedures, and ensure that 
example, will present different hazards from those in all equipment is installed correctly and regularly 

a garage or tech start-up. Almost all types of business maintained. Safety precautions also help protect your 
premises—from a home office or studio, where clients premises and assets from damage due to accidents. 


Protecting yourself and others 


When planning or setting up a workplace, pay attention to these key areas 
to protect yourself and those working for you or visiting your premises. You 
could be prosecuted if your working conditions are found to be dangerous. 


Provide regularly cleaned toilets with Be sure staff involved in the preparation 


soap and handwashing and drying facilities, as well as 
bins for secure waste disposal. If you offer hospitality 
services, you may need extra hygiene measures. 


Follow government and local directives 
on the fire safety responsibilities of landlords and 
commercial tenants. Appoint key employees as fire 
marshals; hold regular emergency drills for all staff. 


of food are trained to meet the legal requirements for 
food hygiene and storage, the proper cleaning of 
utensils and equipment, and pest control measures. 


Avoid harm to people and animals by 
preventing their exposure to chemical or gas toxins, 
such as asbestos, cleaning agents, and machine fumes. 
Follow local regulations for the disposal of toxic waste. 


FIRST STEPS 
Staying Safe in the Workplace 


98/99 IE 


If you are renting premises, be aware of 
the landlord's responsibilities to provide electrical and 
gas safety checks. Inspect for defective plugs, broken 
switches, and damaged cables; make repairs a priority. 


Fit guards around dangerous machine 
parts, display warning notices, and ensure operatives 
are fully trained. Protect equipment users against 
excessive noise, heat or cold, vibration, and radiation. 


Make sure that lighting is adequate and 


that floors are nonslip and kept free of obstructions. 
Clearly mark any sudden changes in floor height. 
Supply stable ladders for staff working at heights. 


a 


Teach staff how to lift objects safely, and 
discourage moving items that could cause injury. Store 
heavy objects on low shelves. Supply carts or other 
equipment for moving large stock items and materials. 


Clearly display signs that follow local 
regulations and reinforce workplace safety procedures 
such as hygiene and waste disposal routines, hazard 
warnings, and what to do in the event of fire. 


ssue Staff the appropriate clothing and 
equipment to give them adequate protection in their 
work, such as face masks, earmuffs, safety boots, 
gloves, and helmets. 


Some individuals, for example, pregnant 
women and people with disabilities—-whether 
employees, clients, customers, or visitors—will need 
special consideration when on your premises . 


Give first-aid training to employees. 
Ensure that first-aid supplies are readily accessible and 
that injured persons get immediate attention. Appoint 
a safety officer to report and record all incidents. 


Thinking Green 


Creating a business that focuses on sustainability or other green 
issues will not only help the fight against climate change but 
can also boost your company’s image and reputation. 


Taking action other options, such as natural or recycled fabrics, 

To become sustainable, a business must try to limit or food products that carry the Fair Trade logo, 

its carbon footprint as much as possible. It should take showing that they are produced ethically (see pp102— 

action to reduce any adverse effects while increasing 103)? With careful sourcing, greener options are 

any positive ones. affordable, especially if the business ensures that 
From a business point of view, a green image can there is minimal waste. However, running a green 


be beneficial. More and more customers like to buy business might require more initial investment 
from companies that can show they care about the 
environment. When they buy a product or service, 7 7 
they want to know it is created sustainably. An Thinking local 
environmentally responsible business also Using local suppliers creates goodwill, 
tends to attract employees who prefer to work benefits the community, and helps a 
for a company that takes an ethical approach. business reduce its carbon footprint. 

Additionally, reducing waste—whether by using 
less electricity and fewer raw materials helps lower 
costs. Sustainability pays other financial dividends, 
too, as more governments around the world impose 
taxes and restrictions on companies that pollute or 
otherwise damage the environment. 


LOCAL RESOURCES 


By sourcing raw materials 
and supplies locally, and 
hiring local staff, a new 
business can keep its fuel 
costs low and build good 
local relationships. Waste 
or unwanted goods can 
prove an invaluable 
resource for local 
innovative recycling 
ventures. 


Achieving sustainability 

One good way to think about the sustainability 

of a business is to divide it into three stages. The 

first is the inputs (source materials) it requires. 

If producing clothes, for example, that could be the 

pric used, or if running a café, it would be the food 

jients. Consider where these materials come 
>they produced sustainably? If not, are there 


Your business will need to follow the environmental 
standards imposed by the government (see pp.212-125). 
These cover activities such as waste disposal, and air 

and water pollution. You might also follow voluntary 
standards, such as choosing to produce only organic 

food. Compliance with mandatory standards is crucial 

to avoid penalties, whereas adopting voluntary standards 
can make a product more attractive to customers and 
add value. 


tinangcren LOO /101 


to get these things right from the start. The next step 
is to think about the energy it takes to make your 
product or offer your service. Most businesses use fuel 
and water. Is there a way to reduce consumption, for While ecologists warn that our 
instance, by using electric vehicles or working from oceans are polluted with plastic 
well-insulated premises? The third is to think about waste, entrepreneurs are finding 
the further effects of the product after purchase. What new ways to recycle plastic into 
type of packaging was used? Is the item made from desirable products. Some create 
recycled materials or can it be recycled? Perhaps the fabrics from plastic waste, while 

: others transform it into furniture, 
packaging can be returned by the customer for a refill, 


ea . bricks, clocks, and fuels, or add 
which is also a good way of ensuring that the customer it to asphalt to strengthen road 


comes back. surfaces. If you are going to use 
Finally, a word of caution. Sustainability credentials plastics in your product make 

can help promote a business and build a reputation, sure they are recyclable (see 

but it is important to keep checking that the venture pp212-215). 

stays environmentally friendly. A good name can be 

lost if people discover that claims are not genuine. 


is the pathway 


MUTUAL BENEFITS to the future 


When a new business draws on local 
resources, everyone benefits from its success. 


> The new restaurant with a menu using local 
produce served by local staff creates its own 
community identity. 


Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General 
of the UN (2007-2016) 


> The furniture restorer who transforms old furniture 
into fashionable new pieces helps reduce waste. 


>» The company that turns scrap cars and vans into 
fully electric vehicles benefits the local community 
and supports the global move to cleaner fuels. 


& 
f 
i 
b 


Cg 


Operating Ethically 


If you take an ethical approach to business by acting honestly 
and openly with your customers and suppliers, you will gain 
a reputation as a fair businessperson. 


Taking responsibility Think about how you would like 

Running your business in an your business to operate by setting ~~ ae =) 
ethical way is important and pays out your values. For example, you VY 
dividends. Customers prefer to buy may decide that your company will Oo 
from ethical sellers, staff prefer to be dedicated to supporting the te 

work for those who treat them fairly, local community or committed to } 


and gaining a good reputation will protecting the environment. Or Workplace 

help you build a loyal following. you may focus on employee health Identify how you can make 

your business a good place to 
work and ensure that you 


Creating a code treat all of your employees 
of conduct fairly and equally. 


Think about your business from ee) 
different viewpoints to help you 
decide what to include in your 
code of conduct. The following 
headings are useful for most 


businesses, but you may want Community 
to add others, depending on Think about how your business can 
the nature of your work. contribute to the local community. You 


could sponsor a sports team or donate 
to a charity. Try to avoid causing any 
negative impacts on your neighbors 
such as noise or pollution. 


* 
SP? 


Environment 
Think about the effects your business 
has on the environment. Identify ways 
you can minimize any damage. For 
example, you could use only recyclable 
packaging or adopt a cycle-to-work 
program to help your employees offset 
the cost of a new bike. 


FIRST STEPS 
Operating Ethically 102 / 103 ))) 


and well-being. Once you have but then you force people to work to buy only from other businesses 
identified your core values, draw long hours, potential employees that trade ethically, then you may 
up acode of conduct: arulebook for will hear about itand go elsewhere. have to pay more for your goods. 
how you and your employees will Make sure you can do what you If you run a clothing store, for 
act. Everyone must understand promise because it takes a long example, you will not want to buy 
how you expect them to operate. time to build a reputation and cheaper garments from factories 
You can share your code of conduct only a short time to destroy it. with poor ethical standards. 
with suppliers and customers. However, customers are usually 
Whatever you decide to focus Making the right choices prepared to pay a little more when 
on, your code of conduct must be Your ethical stance might they buy from companies they trust 
genuine. If you tell people you are sometimes lead to difficult choices. to take this ethical approach, so 


an employer who values their staff If your code of conduct allows you you may not lose out financially. 


i CASE STUDY 


Solarkiosk AG 


Start-ups like Solarkiosk place ethics at the heart of their 
business. Founded in 2011, the German solar technology 
(eo) (eo) firm is “driven by the mission of universal access to 
energy.’ About 20 percent of the world’s poorest people 
live off-grid. Solarkiosk’s flagship product is the E-HUBB, a 
solar-powered mobile kiosk that generates electricity. 
Kiosks are used to charge phones or cool medicines, but 
they also act as small businesses. 


Suppliers and customers 
Always choose to buy from suppliers 
who have an ethical program in place. 
Buy locally to support the business 
community. Strive to be open, honest, 
and transparent with your customers 
and build personal relationships SWS SNis NSE NES A eR Sas UNSEEN OES EURUS TEENS a ReRSRAURSES ESN 

with them. 


“Real integrity 


is doing th 
of Schein, 


Operations 1 
Ensure that all operations in your nobody S 
business are ethical and transparent. ° 
Check that every employee and going to know 
supplier involved in your business 
understands and is working to maintain rN 
your ethical standards. 


Oprah Winfrey, media mogul 


Writing Your 
Business Plan 


Creating a business plan will help guide you at each stage of your 
business and convince others of its viability. The plan acts as a road 
map to get you from where you are now to where you want to be. 


Why do you need a plan? 

When you start a business, it may seem clear where products or services. You can use your business plan 
you want to end up but not how you get there. to secure funding or investment, set goals, monitor 
Writing a concise business plan can give you focus the business’s performance, or reinforce your own 

and direction, explaining the objectives of the belief in the venture. Take time to research and write 
business, what it will sell, how you intend to wina a plan—the more thorough you are, the more likely the 
market share, and how it will operate and promote business is to succeed. 


How to write a business plan 


Write your business plan clearly and explain any 
technical terms. Back up your business proposition 2. THE BUSINESS 
with key market statistics and accurate projections : ° 

of sales and profits. 


founders and managers and their roles. 
Include information on any relevant work 
experience, qualifications, and training— 
both received and planned. 


> Ownership Provide details about the B 


» Trading State briefly where the business 
will trade from and where it will buy the 
goods and materials it needs in order 
to operate. 

> Products and services Describe—in 
fuller detail than in the summary—what 
the business will sell. Include images of 


nast products or of the proposed service in 
The yr bust 9 who action. Touch on what makes your 
i pasics OY cit will ulevator products or services different. 
sane starting jn sells the )» SWOT analysis Review your business's 
Cc ns 6- ystallizing - strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 
i 


threats (see p.155), and say how you 
propose to respond to them. 


TION 
MARKET AND COMPETI! 
3. 


tyour 
expec 
ho you ent. 
s Say W et segm 
> Customet to be-the mark 
custome 


: nents 
Identify any niche seg} 


y they are likely t© buy 


ce. 
rservi 

se you ; 
oduct or U ee your business 


d 

ds Include " 

tee male is ue or 
highlight any trends Y 


FIRST STEPS 


Writing Your Business Plan 104 / 1 @ 5 )) 


5. BUSINESS OPERATIONS 
> Premises and structure Describe the 

base from which your business will Operate 
and any equipment you will use. Explain 
why this locati 


On is well positioned to serve 
your market. 


>» Day-to-day running Outline how 
your business will operate, including how 
Customers will Pay for goods or services, 
ay staff and comply with 
legal requirements, such as health and 
safety, and contingency planning. Include 
supply and distribut 


ion details about how 
Products will get from A to B. 


6. FINANCIAL FORECASTS 

> Sales/costs Project your sales and costs 

(see pp.78-81), month-by-month, over at 
least one year, 


preferably three. Allow for 
seasonal fluctuations. 


> Profit forecast Provide a gross profit 
figure (the predicted turnover of the 
business—all sales—minus the cost of sales) 
and a net profit figure (what remains after 
all expenses are de 


ducted from total sales). 
> Cash flow forecast Defin 


e the payment 
terms for your customers and suppliers, 
and forecast the cash flo 


Ww 
over a 12-month period. F} 


. A 
~— 


Writing an 
Action Plan 


To turn your business strategy into reality, you will need to create 
an action plan. This sets out the specific steps that have to be taken 


to ensure that your business thrives. 


Understanding the basics 
Your action plan should be designed to follow through 
on your business strategy (see pp.36—37). Your 
strategy outlines the overall direction of your business 
and the major decisions you need to take—such as 
identifying who your customers will be and what your 
business will look like in five years’ time. However, 
your action plan should provide precise details about 
your goals and the actions needed to achieve them 
in the day-to-day running of your business. 

When writing your action plan, involve your 
colleagues so you can create and share new 
ideas. Inviting others to contribute also means 
that you are more likely to earn their commitment 
to making your venture a success. 


Getting started 

Start by thinking about the different aspects of 
your company, such as marketing, production, 
and finance. Depending on how complex your 
business is, you may want to write a plan for 


each sphere. Make sure that there are no conflicting 
deadlines in your plan and that the various aspects of 
your business will not have to compete for the same 
resources. If your business is small, you may be able 
to cover all of your activities in a single plan. 

To measure the success of your action plan, specify 
deadlines by which key tasks have to be completed, 
and meet regularly with your staff to discuss any 
changes that need to be made. Be prepared to update 
your plan as necessary. 


Making a plan 


In this example, a mountain tour guide company 
wants to tell potential customers about its new 
winter routes, so it develops an action plan based on 
marketing. More complex steps in the plan, such as 
the social media campaign, will benefit from having 
their own, more detailed action plans. 


THE GOAL KEY STEPS TO TAKE 
To increase awareness Email existing 
and sales of the tour guide customers about the 
company’s new winter new. winter routes, 
mountain routes offering discounts 
Arrange advertising on 
hiking and mountaineering 
websites 
aN Run asocial media 
WK campaign that publicizes 


oe e exciting features of the 
\@ 4 new route 


wainganacionten LOG /107 


POOP O POO THOTT HHH EEE TESS HST OTHHSOEEOT SSE SESH TSHESEEETSESHEH PESTO HEOEEEESES HH ESTOREOSEEEEES 


4 NEED TO KNOW 


> Action plans outline the specific 


fail to plan 


planning to fail steps that a business will take to 
e . . . 
execute its strategic plan, which 
Benjamin Franklin, US inventor and scientist in turn fulfills its business plan. 


> Business plans outline the key 
objectives of a business, such 
as what product or service it 
provides and who for. 

> Strategic plans describe in broad 
terms how a business intends to 
fulfill its business plan. 


Poe eesesesesesessesseesseeeeeeesseeess 


TIME FRAME WHO 1S RESPONSIBLE RESOURCES NEEDED 

Begins: August 17 Ashok (marketing) Ashok’s time; customer 

Completed by: August 21 mailing list 

Begins: August 17 Ashok (marketing) Ashok’s time; list of suitable 

Completed by: August 21 websites; $500 advertising 
budget 

Begins: August 15 Jennifer (marketing) Jennifer's time; digital 

Completed by: October 1 marketing tools 


Understanding 
Consumer Rights 


When starting a business, you need to recognize your legal duties 
toward customers. From the outset, make sure you are aware of 
consumer legislation, which affects both goods and services. 


Selling products In the US, individual states apply 
Consumer laws protect consumers their own rules in addition to 
against unfair selling practices and national law. However, legislation 


unscrupulous vendors. Wherever can be shared between nations, 
your business operates, you need as it is for member countries of 

to understand the rights your the European Union. There are 
customers enjoy under national also increasing efforts to 

and local law. These rulings are internationalize consumer law, 
encompassed not just in consumer particularly because of global trade 
legislation but also, for example, via the internet. The International 
in food safety, electronics, and Consumer Protection and 

labeling laws. Enforcement Network 


A customer's basic 
consumer rights 


Government bodies and consumer 
watchdog groups firmly defend 
consumer rights and will investigate 
unresolved complaints against 
businesses. Before you start selling, 
check local and national government 
websites (see pp.212-215), and 
those of consumer-championing 
organizations, for guidance and 
information relevant to your type of 
business. Rights will vary from state 
to state, and even region to region, 
but are likely to cover the same 
fundamentals of buying goods or 
services—quality, being fit for 
purpose, delivery, returns, and 
repairs. If you sell handbags, for 
example, you would have to meet 
consumer rights in all these areas. 


(ICPEN), for example, works to 
ensure minimum standards of 
consumer protection for cross- 
border purchases. 


Providing services 
Consumer rights apply just as much 
to services, such as a plumbing, 
hairdressing, and building, as they 
do to products. If you provide a 
service, you need to be aware of 
laws that demand certain basic 
standards, including reasonable 
care and skill, binding contracts, 
specified price, and delivery within 


Understanding Consumer Rights 


an agreed time frame. If you fail 
to deliver your service to the 
agreed standards, you may have 
to repeat the service or provide 
compensation. 

A knowledge of consumer rights 
will highlight what protection you 
might need against any legal 
action, such as product liability 
insurance (see pp.94—95). It 
will also help you meet your 
customers’ expectations. An 
issue that is fairly resolved 
may renew a customer's faith 
in your business. 


FIRST STEPS 


108/109 Dm 


“Treat the 
customer like 
you would want 
to be treated. 
Period.” 


Brad Schweig, Vice-president of 
Operations, Sunnyland Patio Furniture 


= 


— 
aie 


A 


Setting Up Your 
Workspace 


No matter where you base your business, planning and organizing your 
workspace will improve your efficiency, productivity, and well-being, 
as well as minimize risks to health and safety. 


Assessing your needs 

A successful workspace is one that 
allows your business to operate 
effectively while also ensuring that 
your needs and those of your staff, 
clients, and customers are met. 
These needs will depend on the 
nature of the business—the ideal 
workspace for a car mechanic 

is very different from that of an 
accountant working at home. 

In each case, however, a well- 
designed workspace that functions 
efficiently can help reduce 


55% 


accidents and illness or stress- 
related problems while increasing 
productivity and well-being (see 
pp.172-173). 

When planning your workspace, 
consider who will be using it and 
the tasks they will be performing, 
ensuring that furnishings are 
appropriate and that devices 
and facilities are easy to use and 
fit for purpose. Importantly, check 
that your workspace is in line with 
any relevant health and safety 
regulations (see pp.212—215). 


of typical employees spend the 
majority of their time away from 


their desks 


iofficecorp.com, 2020 


Buying or renting workspace 

is a major cost, so you will want to 
use your space optimally. The typical 
allowance per desk worker can vary 


from 50-100sq ft (4.5-9 sq m) and 
will include height as well as floor 
area, but check local regulations. 
There are many free online tools 
to help you calculate your space 


requirements. When calculating your 
needs, take into account space for 
people to circulate and any unusable 
areas that are awkwardly shaped or 
poorly lit. Open-plan designs in 
which people share facilities can 
save on space but will not suit all 
types of businesses. Also allow space 
for additional staff down the line. 


The basics 


A business that takes care of employee 
needs by providing comfortable 

and safe working conditions—from 
equipment to temperature—will enjoy 
higher productivity and fewer days 
lost to absenteeism. Although 
employees’ specific needs will vary 
according to the type of work they 
perform, there are some basic 
requirements that are common to 
most workplaces. 


Yi WM wines // Yi, YY 
ss / = Le Wiedey = 
ye ty oy 


y ee space 10: VO paper 
Sup apie ae sts f ty , 
vip ty TF ZO 


SUITABLE FURNITURE 


You will need to provide furniture 
that supports good posture and that 
employees can adjust to suit their 
various needs—particularly if they 
will be sitting for long periods or 
may incur strains over time. Many 
businesses lease their office 
furniture from specialty suppliers. 


HYGIENE AND 
SAFETY 


You must provide access to toilets 
and drinking water and will also 
need to regularly clean your 
premises. Designate a suitable area 
for staff to prepare food and drinks. 
First-aid facilities, smoke detectors, 
and fire extinguishers are also 
mandatory (see pp.98-99). 


GETTING GOING 
Setting Up Your Workspace 


112/113 


wT Ww Ww 
))} 
LIGHT AND SOUND 


Employees will need good lighting 
to work effectively. Aim for as 
much natural light as possible— 
fluorescent lighting should be 
avoided since it can cause eye 
strain. Protect staff from high levels 
of noise or vibration, whether 
through office design, limiting the 
use of noisy equipment, or using 
protective gear. 


WORKING SPACE 


Certain tasks require more space or 
equipment than others, or can be 
hazardous or noisy, so plan for this. 
Other work may involve a need 

for confidentiality or quiet 
concentration and require the use 
of a private area. If possible, also 
allow for a communal space for 
informal staff gatherings. 


VENTILATION AND 
TEMPERATURE 


Make sure your setting has good 
ventilation and clean air. A 
comfortable temperature may 
depend on the kind of work 

being done (sedentary work 
versus physical labor), but 
temperatures should be adjustable 
and take into account heat 
generated by equipment. 


ao 
; oe 
( 


ACCESS 


The space must be suitable for 

all staff, including anyone with 

a disability. When setting up 
workstations and facilities, allow 
enough room to move around 
freely and safely. Allow sufficient 
storage for both work-related and 
personal items to keep floors clear 
of obstructions and maintain a 
clear path to fire exits. 


ee 


e 
LY 
CT hd 


Planning a Website 


To succeed in today’s marketplace, an online presence is essential. A professional- 
looking website will help you grab and retain people’s attention. Careful planning 
will save you time, effort, and money—and deliver a better result. 


Thinking about content 

A website's look and feel are important, but engaging 
content is what really attracts visitors to your site. 
Before writing any text, taking photos, or drafting 
designs, outline what the content of your website will 
be when it launches, how it will be structured (see 
below), and how you will amend and add to the 
content as your business develops. 

Consider your site’s purpose: a site that provides 
content (information), for example, has very different 
requirements from one through which people will be 
making purchases (see box, right). Think about your 


target audience and investigate what kind of content is 
working well on similar sites, from instructional videos 
to popular photo stories. 


Choosing a domain name 

Deciding on the right domain name—your website’s 
address on the internet—is as important as selecting 
the right business name (see pp.58—59). The domain 
name and business’s name do not need to be the same, 
although this can be helpful. Your domain name should 
describe the business and contain key words for 
search engines. For example, a bike repair shop might 


Mapping your 
site’s structure 


Sketching out a possible structure 
for your website is a useful way to 
decide how best to order the 
content, even if you are simply 
using an existing website template 
(see pp.116-117). A simple, 
pyramid-like hierarchy—from 
home page at the top to main 
categories, then subcategories— 
makes it easy for users to navigate 
the site. It also helps search 
engines find and index the content 
swiftly. This, in turn, improves the 
chance of your site appearing 
higher up in the results of internet 
searches (known as search engine 


optimization). 
Product 
area 1 


i 


Product 
area 2 


Pamngawerste 114/115 


choose a domain name that includes the words “fix” 
and “bike.” A short name that is simple, easy to type, 
and memorable is best. You should also avoid numbers 
and hyphens, since they can be confusing. 

Select the appropriate domain extension for the 
business. Commercial businesses tend to use 

“com,” whereas “.net” is more appropriate for internet, 
email, and networking services. If you want to appeal 
to a more local audience, there are also country- and 
even region-specific extensions, such as “.ca” fora 
business in Canada or “.uk” for one in the UK. 

To obtain your domain name, visit a domain name 
registrar, check whether your preferred domain name 
is available, and pay a fee to lease the name. You will 
also need to use a web-hosting service, which allows 
your website to be accessed on the web. Some 
companies provide both hosting and domain names. 


Your website's purpose will influence the design and 
whether the site is static (always shows the same content) 
or dynamic (shows different content according to the 
user). Many sites that aim to provide information, called 
content websites, are static, while e-commerce sites— 
online shops—tend to be dynamic, with pages tailored 

to the needs of individual customers who visit the site. 


Content websites 


A content site might give a general overview of a topic, 
such as caring for cats; focus on a specific aspect, such 
as breeds; or narrow to key terms, such as a particular 
breed. You can secure funding for content sites in various 
ways: a Cat site, for example, might be funded by a pet 
food company or have links to an e-commerce site. 
Other ways to generate income include advertising and 
affiliate marketing (see p.35). If your site is instructional, 
you might offer products, such as e-books, or services, 
such as courses, seminars, or consultancy. Social media 
offers another way to be visible (see pp.140-141). 


An e-commerce site showcases goods, such as pet foods, 
and allows customers to make online purchases. Like real 
storefronts, such sites need to be eye-catching and 
regularly updated. The ordering and payment process 
should be straightforward and hassle-free (via a trusted 
system, such as PayPal) with a clear return/refund policy. 


Designing and 
*; Building a Website 


An attractive, user-friendly website gives your business the edge on its 
competitors. Take time to examine all your possible options and choose 
carefully to ensure the site will meet your present and future needs. 


Build for usability 

Whether its purpose is to provide information about 
your company or to sell goods or services, your website 
must be accessible and easy to use. To get started, you 
will need a web-hosting service (See pp.114—115). Some 
website builders offer combined web hosting and 
templates, which is an attractive option, but may not 


Ways to build 
a website 


Website building can be quite 
straightforward, requiring no 
knowledge of computer code. 
Website builders enable you 

to simply drop your content into 
templates. Content management 
systems require a little more 
know-how but offer more control 
over your site’s structure. Building 
your own site, or hiring someone 
to do it for you, offers the greatest 
creative freedom but requires 
technical skill. 


meet all your needs. Shared web hosting, for 
example, means sharing hardware with multiple 
other users, which can slow down your website’s 
operating time, and some website builders are 

not “search engine optimization” (SEO) friendly 
(see p.118-119), making it harder for users to access 
your content. A content management system (CMS) 


WEBSITE BUILDER 
> Requires little skill and no knowledge of code. 
> Website builders may also offer free web hosting. 


> Various subscription models let you choose what you 
need in terms of ready-made page templates and tools 
to support page layout. Some offer multilingual options. 


GETTING GOING 
Designing and Building a Website 


116/117 


offers more design options and your own choice of 
web host, whereas creating your own unique site 
from scratch requires web-design expertise. 
However you build your website, your homepage 
should set the scene with a clear statement that 
summarizes the business. Use minimal text, bold 
images, and a consistent design throughout to help 
users identify key information and navigate easily. 


Make it mobile-friendly 

By 2022, monthly global data traffic will be 

77 exabytes. To meet this challenge, it is worth 
ensuring that your website is also “responsive”, 
meaning it is optimized to fit a screen of any size 
(even a watch) and can still be clearly read. 


a 


Web 


1 


Jakob Nielson, “How Long Do Users Stay on Web 
Pages,” nngroup.com, 2011 


CONTENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (CMS) 


> Requires some skill but offers more control over design 
and features. WordPress is the most popular CMS. 


> Software enables users to create, store, search, and 
manage content that is typically stored on a database. 


) Useful for sites with changing content, such as blogs. 


BUILD FROM SCRATCH 
> Involves using code to program a website line-by-line. 
> Time-consuming but ensures design freedom rather than 
relying on templates, resulting in a unique website. 
> Requires knowledge of coding and web development 
fundamentals, such as HTML and CSS. 


A 


Making your site more visible 

To view your website, potential customers or clients 
must first be able to find it. You can make this easier 
in several ways, such as by promoting your website 
online, through social media and advertising, and, 
most important, by making your website easy to 


Attracting 
Website Traffic 


Increasing the “visibility” of your website will help potential customers 
or clients find it. There are various things you can do to make your site 
more likely to get picked up by search engines trawling the web. 


that search engines will pick up on. Your site’s title 
page (as it appears in your website’s code), links from 
other sites to yours (called backlinks), and the words 
that you use in your links (phrases with hyperlinked 
text) can all help grab the attention of search engines. 
Sites that are regularly updated with good content 


find using search engine optimization (SEO). 


Understanding SEO 
Search engines, such as Google, collect data from 
every page on the web, then use algorithms (math 
processes usually in computer programs) to 
turn this data into search results. The hig! 


higher 
the algorithms rank your site, the higher it 
will appear in the list of search results 
and the more likely it is to be seen, 
(see p.215). There are things you must 
do to improve your search ranking, 
such as including keywords in your 
site’s content. These are words or 
phrases that people might use as 


search terms when looking for 
your products or services and 


SEO 


SEO is not a one-off 
task; you will need to 
keep up-to-date with 
what factors will help 

search engines rank 


Driving traffic 


Focusing on factors that improve 
search engine optimization (SEO) 
is an essential strategy. Having 
lots of backlinks to your site, 

for example, is something that 
search engines rate highly. Some 
strategies for driving traffic 
(increasing visitors to your site) 
are quick and cheap; others may 
require more investment or 

the hiring of expert help, 
depending on your skill set. 


your website higher 
in search listings, such 
as keywords and 
backlinks, and update 
your website content 
accordingly. 


will also rise in the ranks. 


KEYWORDS 


Research keywords 
using a keyword tool, 
such as Keyword 
Planner or Keyword 
Explorer. Insert those 
words and phrases 
relevant to your 
business within the 
first 160 words of your 
web page, using each 
keyword only once. 


Mie. 


BACKLINKS 


The higher the quality 
of your content, the 
more other websites 

will want to link to 
yours. Provide html 
links in your messages 
to copy and paste. 
An easy way to get 
backlinks is to sign up 
to online business 
directories, then link 
from the directories to 
your website. 


CONTENT 


Generate interesting 
content and keep it 
fresh, updating it as 
often as possible. It 
will not only be useful 
to your customers but 
will also boost your 
search ranking. Also 
post content on other 
sites, such as YouTube, 
that will link to yours. 


GETTING GOING 
Attracting Website Traffic 1 18 / 1 19 ))) 


Moz.com, 2014 


SOCIAL MEDIA 


Create a profile for 
your business on the 
main social media 
platforms, and post 
when you know your 


audience is active or 


online. Offer further 
content that can be 
accessed via a link to 
your website (see 
pp.140-141). 


first page 


traffic clicks 


KA NEED TO KNOW 


> Broad targeting means aiming 
toward a mass audience. 


» Cookies are files placed ona 
website user’s computer, used 
to track returning visitors 


» Data management platforms 
are software tools that track 
website visitors with cookies and 
pull together a profile of customer 
demographics and habits. 

> Keyword targeting is using 
keywords relating to your product 
to improve your ranking in search 
engine results. 


> Narrow targeting, also called 
interest group targeting, is seeking 
a specific group of consumers. 


MARKETING 


Build a customer 
database and ask 
permission from your 
customers to send 
them marketing 
information. Then run 
an email marketing 
campaign with an 
offer, including a link 
to your website. 


ADVERTISING 
Try pay-per-click social 
media advertising in 
different channels, 
targeting customers by 
age, location, or other 
criteria (see pp. 
138-139). Monitor and 
then adjust keywords 
and targeting. Display 
your web address 
offline, on business 
cards, storefronts, 
or vehicles. 


4 Data Protection 


It is crucial to protect all the financial data and any other sensitive 
information stored on your business computers from cyber attack. Taking a 
few basic measures can make the difference between safety and disaster. 


Staying secure Many cyber attacks target technical weaknesses in 
Small businesses are more likely to suffer a cyber computer systems. Make sure your computer hardware 
attack than large ones, since they have less tospendon includes antivirus software and fire walls (programs 
security and rarely have in-house IT teams. However, that block unauthorized access), and keep them turned 
effective precautions can be cheap, or even free. on. This will place barriers between your computer 


Information security 


Protecting your business from online criminals is essential, as successful attacks 

can be financially damaging and undermine customer and investor confidence. 

You also have a legal obligation to protect customer data (see pp.212-215). You must 
take protective measures before any computer systems go live. 


Budget for your cybersecurity needs Introduce essential cybersecurity 

To safeguard your data, purchase appropriate Around 80 percent of security breaches can be 

equipment and software and seek expert advice. prevented by installing software to protect systems 
and control device usage. 


> Back up all business-related data daily and store 
it securely—and separate from any computer 


> Install and switch > Control the use 
on fire wall programs of USB drives and 


> Store data on a hard drive and a cloud storage memory cards 


service. A cloud software subscription buys 
cybersecurity software for all your computers 


> Install and activate 
antivirus software > Protect passwords 

) Update software and and make sure they are 
firmware (software as strong as possible 
fixed into hardware) 


> Pay for risk analysis and have the software 
installed by a certified technician 


LELLILI “40d 


cormmecome 120/121 


network and potential attackers. 
Criminals may also try to gain NEED TO KNOW 
access to data through human 

= g . : > Malware is short for malicious 
vulnerability. To avoid this, train 

F . software—any program that 

staff to recognize potential attacks, O damages a computer's operating 
such as phishing, where emails system and the data it contains. 


are used to trick the receiver into > Ransomware is malware that 
giving away passwords and user of data b reaches infects a computer and demands 


names, or malware programs, 4 a ransom to be paid electronically 
which install on a computer Invo | ve sto | en ’ in return for restoring the 
when you click on a link or email. computer to normal. 

Seek free data protection advice d efau It, or weak > Denial of service is a cyber 


i izati attack that floods computer or 
from business organizations and p asswo rd S Pp 


government agencies. Also, be ay EGC IES ILA EES 

A Verizon, Data Breach Investigations u Ing, 
Bute +0 meet aby eyberseeuliny Report, enterprise.verizon.com, 2016 allowing criminals to gain access. 
regulations. 


See eoseesseesessesoesssesosesssseseses 


MMMM 


/ J Jf YL SE b Jf 
WY fftt##77” 


~ 


RRA VV 


Test and update computer security Keep staff alert 
Cyber attackers continually find new ways to steal Take the lead and inform staff of the dangers of 
data, so you need to be constantly on your guard. cyber attack and how it can impact the business. 


> Use vulnerability scan programs to identify any > Teach staff, particularly those in closest contact with 
weak points in your computer system, whether sensitive data, how to spot and report attacks 
outside the network or inside—once a “trusted > Encourage safe browsing so that staff recognize 
user” has signed in suspect emails, text messages, apps, and web links 

> Make sure the latest security software is 
installed on your computers 

> Check that all default passwords on new 
devices and software have been reset 


ZY V4 a ) YY Yj 


Finding the 
*) Right Talent 


Attracting the right people to work for you will give your business a 
competitive edge. Although you may not be able to afford permanent 
staff, there are other ways of bringing talented people on board. 


Identifying your needs 

Before looking for potential employees, think carefully 
about the work that needs to be done. Taking on staff 
is a big commitment, since recruitment (see pp.124— 
125), induction, and training all take time and money. 
Consider whether you could outsource the work to 
another organization instead (see pp.50—51). For 
example, many small businesses now outsource 

their accounting and payroll activities. This avoids 
the need to employ dedicated staff, allowing you to 
focus on running the business. Decide whether the 
work is short term or requires special skills, such as 
web design or marketing, and whether it could be 


When looking for the right people 
to fill roles in your business, here 
are some factors to keep in mind. 


> Try several sources to find 
suitable talent 


> Ask friends and family to refer 
qualified candidates to you 

> Identify several candidates in 
case one turns the role down 

> Keep in touch with skilled people 
you may need in the future 


> Promise anything that you 
are unable to deliver 


> Rush into making a decision; 
consider all candidates carefully 


undertaken on a freelance basis. A specialist 

freelancer can provide the expertise you need 

for the duration of a specific task or project. 
Alternatively, if the work is seasonal, or for 

a limited time period, and requires specific skills 

or experience, you may wish to employ someone 

on a fixed-term contract. This approach can provide 

the help you need without a long-term commitment 

and its associated costs. 

rd 


Catching the talent 


Once you have decided upon the type of candidate 

you need and how you want to employ them (on a 
freelance, contract, full- or part-time basis) you can select 
the best way of finding them. Commonly used sources are: 


rnangtergnitaent 122/123 


Attracting candidates 

If your company has a good reputation, it will attract 
the best candidates. To find out what makes an 
employer appealing, ask your own employees, find 
out how other managers run their businesses, and of 
study advertisements to see how other companies - 
entice their talent. Having a good reputation is vital, \ i« f 
but whatever you tell candidates about your business 
must be genuine. If you promise training, for example, 
and do not provide it, they may leave, and your time "2020 HR Statistics: Job Search, Hiring, 
and effort will have been wasted. Recruiting & Interviews”, Zety.com, 2020 


Far) 
nd 


ae eee eb 
conta (NOW 


are seeking talent 
to hire. 


~ <A 


of searching. 3 


| SS @D Oe 
6 __ TALENT . «A 


A 


° 
CT bd 


Recruiting Staff 


To find employees with the right skills, knowledge, and attitude for your 
business, you need to plan the recruitment process in detail—from advertising 
the role and creating a job description to interviewing and making a decision. 


Hiring effectively is key, but characteristics, such as to someone else. Experience of a 
Hiring the right person is a the ability to work in a team or use similar business is also invaluable, 
time-consuming process, so it one’s own initiative, may be equally affording insights into different 

is essential to plan ahead. Think important. If someone has to work ways of doing things. Looking at 
about the role and the qualities alone in an office, forexample, they advertisements for similar jobs 

of the person who is most likely to will need to be confident enough will give you an idea of the typical 


succeed at it. Having the right skills to handle queries without deferring salary and the key skills for the role. 


Finding the right person 


A job description will help you attract and assess candidates 
and decide who to interview. Planning the interview in detail ? 


will guide you toward choosing the right person. 


Reviewing applications 
The job description provides a guide for 


Creating a job description assessing candidates. Use the skills and 
qualities you have listed to decide 


whether candidates meet your needs. 


This is an essential step in the recruitment 
process, as it determines which applicants you 


will attract. An effective description will provide > Divide applications into three groups: 
candidates with a clear picture of the job and likely, not sure, and unlikely. 
the specific skills and knowledge required. > Focus on skills and experience rather than 


personal details such as someone's name, 


> Define the job title ) Describe the ORAL CA LCL CA LAOS 


clearly, including how main duties j 
the role fits into the and responsibilities. ) Look out for someone who has experience 
wider business. > Set out the terms Vee py Oe erry 

> Outline skills and of employment in POV ED ye ge 
experience, plus any detail, such as hours, » Make notes as these will help form 
qualifications required, salary, location, questions at the interview stage. 
being reasonable in sick pay, and > Keep a record of candidates who are not 


your expectations. vacation allowance. right for this job but might suit a future role. 


crrmmacome 124/125 


0 BE AWARE 


> Make sure that all interview 
questions are nondiscriminatory 
and relevant to the role. 

> Avoid personal questions about 
marital status or religion, which 
could lead to legal action. 

> Be mindful that health and 
disability are also sensitive areas. 


There are many channels for 
recruitment (see pp.122—123), 
including online job sites and 
talking to friends. Think about 

the best place to find the person 
appropriate for your post and begin 
the recruitment process. Decide 
who will be involved and what 
your timeline and budget will be. 
Next, create an onboarding plan to 
introduce the new recruit to their 


global 
workforce 
seeking a job 


colleagues and the business. 


Short-listing and interviewing 

Ashort list identifies the strongest applicants for interviewing. 

You may wish to conduct short telephone interviews first to screen 
weaker candidates. Plan the timing and order of the interview, and 
make a list of questions to ensure consistency. 


> Let the candidate know 
in advance what form the 
interview will take and 
roughly how long it will be. 

> Put the interviewee at ease 
and encourage them to talk. 

> Ask open questions that 
cannot be answered with a 
simple yes or no. 

> Watch how they react to your 
questions and listen carefully to 
their responses. Make notes. 


> Find out what motivates the 
interviewee. Ask what they like 
doing most or least. 


> Ask the candidate to describe 
specific work situations that 
illustrate their experience. 


> Devise a test to check the 
skills of the candidate. 


> Introduce the interviewee 
to staff afterward—less formal 
situations often reveal how 
likely an individual is to fit in. 


Business.linkedIn.com 


Choosing the right person 


The interview should reveal which 
candidate has the best skills and 
experience. Make sure you feel that 
the candidate has the right attitude for 
the job, as this is hard to change later. 


> Make sure that you can justify 
the reasons for your choice. 


> Call the successful applicant to offer 
them the job. Ensure you know their 
salary requirements before doing this. 


> Draw up a contract, setting out the 
conditions of employment to send 
to the new recruit. 


> Notify and thank the unsuccessful 
candidates. You may want to give 
them constructive feedback. 


Do You Need 
a Manager? 


As your business grows, you may have to think about hiring a manager. 
Understanding the responsibilities and skills of a manager will help you 
weigh the advantages against the cost of their salary. 


Sharing the load 
Even if you have the time and skills 
needed to oversee every part of 
your venture at the start, that may 
change as your business develops. 
You could find yourself pulled away 
from your priorities or without the 
skills to take the business further. 
Recruiting a manager could 
reduce your workload and bring 
in much-needed expertise—but 
it is a big decision. A managerial 
salary will add a significant extra 
cost to the business, and you may 
be apprehensive about handing 
over authority to an outsider. 


Coordinating 
your business 


A skilled manager will pull 
together all the different 
areas of a business to 
produce a successful 


outcome. They will Organizing 
have an overview resources 


and where the 
problems are, 


and take action 
as necessary. A “us gm, gia, 
good manager 
will be adept at 


of what everyone Makes sure people have | : 


is doing, observe what they need to get their 
what is going well work done effectively. 


Remember, you could bring 

a manager onto your team as 
a temporary measure to begin 
with, to see if this is right for 
your business. 


Directing projects 


Looking ahead 
While you are still able 
to run the business 
yourself, consider 

how it might 


Managing staff 


Provides support, motivation, 
and essential training to help staff 
perform their roles effectively. 


5ee 


aie 


K 
7. 


*: d ! 
the following: i it Ree $-0000000000000-.<>._, 
t Mm BB spntae000000000eseen 


Agrees and sticks to timescales and 
budgets, and makes sure targets are 
met and goals achieved. 


1, 
‘ 


4 


develop—you may need to take 

on staff, introduce new products, 
or carry out more ambitious 
marketing. Think about how much 
of this you could manage on your 
own, and identify areas where you 
would benefit from experienced 
help. Also consider your existing 
workload and how it will increase 


Maintaining order 

Puts efficient processes in place so 

staff understand what to do and ensures 
consistency in what is being done. 


5 ae 


GETTING GOING 
Do You Need a Manager? 


126/127 


as the business grows. Planning 
ahead will highlight which skills 
and experience you may need ina 
future manager, as well as which 
parts of the business will most 
benefit from your own skills. This 
will also give you a time frame 
within which to find, and budget 
for, the ideal candidate. 

Do not rush the recruitment 
process (see pp.124—-125). A 
highly capable manager may 
need some persuasion to join a 

new business, especially if 
it means resigning from 


an existing position. 


Communicating 


Establishes good channels 
of communication so all 
employees understand their 
role and what is happening 
elsewhere in the business. 


When choosing a manager, look 

for someone who is 

> Full of ideas that are relevant 
and fresh. 


> Confident enough to challenge 
and improve existing methods. 


> Versatile and capable of thriving 
with minimal supervision. 


> Trustworthy and personable, 
inspiring loyalty in employees. 

> Passionate about coaching and 
developing a team. 


are 
the most creative 
people 


Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 
Indian guru and businessman 


Getting 
things done 
Observes activity 

across the whole 
business to assess the 
effectiveness of work 


processes and the 

well-being of staff, 
ensuring tasks are 
completed and 
roles are fulfilled. 


Diversity 


and Inclusion 


A diverse and inclusive workplace makes for a more successful business. Recruit 
from a wider pool of talented people and create an environment where all are 
welcome and appreciated and more likely to enjoy their work and contribute. 


What is diversity? 
Diversity extends beyond considerations of race, 
gender, and disability. More broadly, it encompasses 
all the characteristics or qualities that make a person 
different from yourself. When recruiting, there is a 
subconscious tendency to look for people who are 
like you, so pay attention to diversity to help you 
move away from that bias and think more openly. 
This is not just to ensure legal compliance: firms that 
embrace diversity are likely to be more profitable, so it 
is good business sense to have a welcoming outlook 
and reflect the globally connected marketplace. 


Why diversity 
matters 


Encouraging diversity brings many 
benefits to a business. Not only will 
your firm be able to draw on a wider 
pool of talent with fresh ideas, but it 
will also be in a better position to 
connect with a range of customers. 
A diverse company will also have a 
better understanding of the wants 
and needs of that wider audience. 


2 


STRATEGIES 


Set in place a plan to encourage 
diversity from recruitment to 
onboarding to marketing. Everyone 
involved must understand the 
benefits and not see a focus on 
diversity as merely compliance 
with the law. Social media used to 
promote the business should both 
depict and engage with a wide 
range of individuals and groups. 


Research carried out by US management consultants 
McKinsey & Co. showed that diverse businesses are 
more successful at winning top talent, score higher 
on employee satisfaction, have a deeper understanding 
of their customers, and are better at decision-making. 
Diversity is about recruiting and doing business 
with a broader range of people, while inclusion 
involves sustaining an open and welcoming work 
atmosphere. A new business needs to strive to 
promote an inclusive culture, where people feel 
safe to make suggestions, without worrying how 
their views will be received. 


BENEFITS 


even unconventional, ideas. 


People who think in the same way 
are likely to come up with a similar, 
limited range of ideas. Involve a 
diverse group of people, however, 
and creativity will soar. Diversity 
improves innovation as people 
bring their different perspectives 
and feel freer to propose original, 


POCO O EHS H SEO EEHEH HEE TEEEH ST OEE ESSE OTE SEHES ESS EEHTE HT ESEOES ES ETESEOEEESEESEES 


Understanding unconscious bias 

Studies have shown that people can have preferences 
of which they are unaware that may guide their 
choices—a state known as unconscious bias. These 
preferences are often based on stereotypes and beliefs 
that are ingrained and unconscious. Many organizations 
offer “unconscious bias training” that aims to bring 
these hidden prejudices, held by everyone to a greater 
or lesser extent, to light. Further research indicates 
that these biases can affect who is recruited even 
when candidates are presenting with identical CVs, 
so identifying and addressing these preferences is 
key to becoming a more open and diverse workplace. 


INCLUSION 


cy A 
le dT 
\. 


It is also important to follow 
through on a pledge to encourage 
diversity by making sure all 
members of staff are made to feel 
welcome. This may mean being 
flexible to accommodate different 
ways of doing things. Keeping an 
open and honest dialogue with all 
your employees will help everyone 
feel heard and valued. 


GETTING GOING 
Diversity and Inclusion 


128/129 


eseccescosere 


Many countries across the world now have 
antidiscrimination laws of some kind (see pp.212-215) 

in order to stop businesses from discriminating against 
individuals based on protected characteristics. These 
characteristics can include age, disability, race, religion, 
gender, or sexual orientation. Every individual must be 
dealt with fairly, equally, and in accordance with national 


law, all the way through the employment life cycle—from 
placing an advertisement for an employee to equal 
treatment in the workplace. Business practices are 
falling under greater scrutiny. It is not only a matter 

of criminal law; in some countries, civil law may also 
apply, meaning that an employee could claim for 
personal compensation if an employer is proven to 

have discriminated against them. 


being invited | 
to the party; | 
ion is 
being asked 
to dance. 


Verna Myers, US activist 


Using a Customer 
* Data System 


The better you understand your customers or clients, the better you can meet 
their needs and encourage them to keep coming back. Customer relationship 
management (CRM) software can help you with this. 


Understanding 

CRM systems 

Your customers and clients will 
expect to be able to access your 
business online, whether to order 
goods, find special offers, book 


appointments, or just ask questions. 
These interactions (known as 
“touchpoints”) can tell you a great 
deal about your customers—what 
they are interested in, what they 
buy and when, how often they 


shop, and how much they spend. 
CRM software is widely available 
online to help you capture and 
analyze this data. You can use it 

to ensure your business offers your 
customers what they want, when 


Using a CRM system 


A CRM system works by collecting and analyzing data about customers’ or clients’ purchasing and communication history 
with your business. You can then use this data to better understand and target your customers and clients. Even a simple 
CRM system will help you in building customer relationships, improving customer service, and increasing the productivity 
and profitability of your business. 


Gathering data from customers and clients 


Existing and potential customers can interact with your CRM system in many different ways. Encourage this at every 
opportunity, so you understand their needs and expectations before they do business with you, and at every step 
along the journey. The more data the system collects, the more you can learn. Here are some ways to achieve this: 


Create a website 

Create an eye-catching 
=) } website that draws users 

in and promotes your 
business. Use it to sell the brand 
and get people talking about you. 


Use social media 

Create a business profile 
and post relevant content. 
Aim to engage customers 
and clients in a conversation. 


Send regular 

e-communications 

Email newsletters 

tailored to the interests 
of clients and customers. Write a 
blog and post videos online about 
your business. 


Reward customers 

Offer incentives 

to customers for 

recommending your 
business. Reward repeat customers. 


Promote products 

or services 

Give regular discounts 

and special offers to 
attract attention to your business. 


Meet customers 
Plan events, where 
you can engage with 
customers and clients. 
Invite people to sign up to your 
mailing list. 


Improve customer 

experience 

Impress customers and 

clients by exceeding 
expectations. Offer a personalized 
service, quality goods, unique 
packaging, and prompt delivery. 


Follow-up complaints 

Handle and resolve 

complaints properly. 

Where purchases 
require installation/service, follow 
up with customers and clients 
promptly, and provide detailed 
FAQs on your website. 


Using a rrr 130 / 1 3 1 ))) 


they want it, and at a price they [A - : 
are willing to pay. You can also use NEED TO KNOW There is on ly 


CRM software to manage how you 


? : » Contacts are existing clients 
pacman! rs ont iad’ or customers who have already one boss. The 
ene CHES, CY aulomarlcahy urchased a product or service 
emailing personalized invoices, ha a hee cu sto mer. An d h e 
receipts, reminders, and marketing > CRM technology captures ° 
material or promotional offers. and analyzes customer can fi re eve ry body 
data automatically through 7 
Investing in CRM their transactions. in the com pany 
You may feel that you want to delay > Data analysis examines the fro m the ch al rm an 
installing a CRM system until your information gathered to help the : 
business is established. However, business operate more efficiently. on d own ; sim p ly 
the better you understand your > Leads are potential future : 
customers or clients, the more customers or clients. by S pe n d in g 
competitive your business will be. > Net promoter score measures . 
There are many systems available, customer or client satisfaction by h is mo ney 


including bespoke ones, so look their willingness to recommend 


é m” 
online to find independent advice ee pe som ewhere else. 


from a CRM consultant. eG 'alernelaleraee le Gineeelsees siprarsteraraletataretave ela Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. 


Using customer data 


Capturing as much data as possible will give youa 
broad insight into your customers and clients. You 
can then organize and analyze this data into useful 
information to guide future business decisions. 


> Identify customers’ characteristics, including 
their buying habits, seasons, and times of 
purchase, as well as special interests—this can help 
you target these specific groups. 


> Highlight patterns and trends, such as fashions 
and growing interests, which reveals areas you can 
tap into and exploit. You can also spot new and 
growing markets and those in decline. 


> Analyze marketing responses to monitor the 
effectiveness of your campaigns. If customers 
do not respond, you know you need to try a 
different approach. 


> Target customers or clients who are high 
spenders with customized marketing. 


Preparing 
for Launch 


Before taking your business live, build in a prelaunch stage when 
you can test each component—from branding to product—and 
tweak as necessary to ensure you achieve the best possible launch. 


Preparing to launch 


Careful prelaunch planning will ensure that your groups to survey to gain more objective judgments. 
business is fully prepared for liftoff. This is the time If building a new website to support your business, 
for crucial small-scale testing of your product or consider creating a landing page with a form to get 
service, branding, website, marketing approach, on your waiting list to be let in the launch. 


and any other key component of the business. 
Getting feedback from a sample of your target 
audience a few months in advance of your launch 
will give you time to adjust your approach if 
necessary to address criticisms and to incorporate 
helpful new ideas. 

To keep costs low, discuss your ideas with as 
many friends, peers, and family members as possible— 
especially those who match the characteristics of your NCW p rod ucts 
target customer (see pp.40—41). Show them what you 
plan to launch and get their honest opinions. 

Ask those who match your target customer profile 


which social media or internet forums they use; their e€ac h year—95 % fai | 


preferences will help you decide which external Clayton Christensen, Harvard Business School 


Testing and trialing Feedback mechanisms 


Test strategy 


Having created a product to 
appeal to a certain audience, 
you now need to find out where 
those people gather (virtually 
or physically) and seek their 
opinions. Approach them via 

a website that sells your type 
of product, host a brief online 
survey, conduct shopping- 
center or store interviews, or 
use a focus group, if affordable. 


Methods for refining your 
product include click-testing 
ona website frequented by 
your target customers; 
running a trial in a store; and 
holding a pop-up event. 


Talk to family, friends, and 
% colleagues. Online, budget 
, fora brief survey; question 
| customer groups; set up a 
web page to solicit 
reactions and advice. 


repangoriancs LOO/ 133 


COPS HHO ST SETHE OTE HEOTESE SET HEEHESESOTH OTE ETHSHEESEE ETOH EEO HEHEESTEEEHEEESE TEESE EEEEEEEES 


~ 


4m 


TTT ATTA TAT AA AAA TATA TT ATA AT a. 


PRELAUNCH 


CHECKLIST EE 
> Complete any tweaks to oe oe 4 
your product or marketing TT | Uh 
program, and retest. | +4 v 
TTT 
| 
| 


> Test how well your website 
functions (if you have one), 
and ask others to test it, too. 


> Gather relevant publicity 
contacts, such as magazine 
editors, bloggers, and social 
media influencers. | | a 


> Finalize the marketing and | I 
promotion plan, covering | | 
who to communicate with 
and when. ra 


> Create a timeline to your rH 
launch day, and do a dry 
run of any events planned, 
if feasible. 


sbbvbbpbbbbbba. 


V \ 
f\ / 


IOOOIIIOO 
OOlIIloo Use focus groups 


Setting up a focus group is 
not cheap but can be highly 
effective. You need a venue, 
5 to 10 participants who match 
your customer profile, and a 
mediator to moderate and ask 


them well-designed questions 
about your product offering. __ 


the Word 


Before spending money on costly marketing campaigns, 
consider using low-cost methods of promoting your 
products or services yourself to generate sales. 


af 


Telling the world 

Marketing your products and services is essential 
in order to attract sales. While your budget may not 
allow for professional campaigns at first, there are 
steps you can take to spread the word at minimal 
cost. Known as “organic marketing,” this approach 
simply requires your time, energy, and creativity. 

Organic marketing involves any means of getting 
your message out to potential customers and clients. 
This can include writing a blog, attending local fairs, 
handing out samples of your product, or posting your 
business details on free online directories. 

This approach is less direct than conventional 
advertising, so the benefits may be slow to materialize. 
However, research shows that more than 70 percent 
of consumers ignore paid-for advertising and have 
greater trust in “word-of-mouth” messages, triggered 
by customer experience, as they appear to be more 
authentic. As such, even when you can afford to 
undertake more traditional marketing techniques, 
organic methods are well worth continuing. |p 


Spreading | 


Creative approaches i REPRESENT 
ve THE BUSINESS 


» Attend industry events, where 
you can talk about and show your 
products or services. Share your 
details and build contacts. 


The primary aim of marketing is to 
promote sales, and should work in 
conjunction with your public relations 
activities, (see pp.136-137). When 
using organic marketing, be creative, 
and use as many methods and 
channels as possible, to target 
potential customers and clients. 


However, always | | | 
WT 


> Participate in community events, 
such as fairs and shows, to meet 
potential customers and clients. 

Demonstrate what you offer. 


HI well | 


approaches are 


sresangmewod 104/135 DE 


POPP TOS HHH EH SEES ESET ESET BED HEHE EHETES OSE EEH EEE EOOD 


MAKE MORE 
ONLINE CONTENT 


>» Demonstrate and promote your 
products and services on online 
video sharing sites and forums. 


> Write blogs and articles that 
feature your products and services. 
> Publish positive testimonials from 
satisfied customers. Encourage 
customers to post feedback. 


TARGET 
SOCIAL MEDIA 


> Join all relevant social media 
groups and highlight your business. 


» Develop social media relationships 
with complimentary businesses. 
Like and share their posts. 


> Befriend popular influencers 
to attract their followers to your 
profile and website, if you have one. 


4 USE 

ic ALL CHANNELS 

> Build a website, even just a basic 
one, to promote your products 
and services. 


> Post your business details on all 
relevant local and online business 
directories with links to your website. 


> Use online auction sites to sell 
and promote your offering. 


OFFER 

PROMOTIONS 

> Offer friends-and-family benefits 
to existing customers. 


> Reward customers for referring 
your products and services to their 
friends and contacts. 

> Use giveaways and competitions 

as an opportunity to get people 

to try your products and services. 


All 
4 ld 


do not trust 
traditional 
ads 


McCarthy Group, 2014 


til 


| Creating a Buzz 


While marketing encourages the sale of your products and services, 
public relations (PR) aims to promote your business and brand. It is 


st 


a valuable tool to help gain interest, customer loyalty, and sales. 


Understanding publicity 

As anew business owner, it is important to learn how 
to use PR to generate and maintain a positive image of 
your company and brand. It is key to establishing your 
brand’s personality (see pp.60—61), and can strongly 
influence how willing people are to deal with you, 
including customers, suppliers, and even investors. 

PR is an ongoing process that starts by creating a 
public image of your brand, what it is, and what it 
stands for. It then uses publicity to carefully manage 
how the business or brand is perceived externally. 


x 


USE THE INTERNET 


The internet provides a wealth of free 

opportunities to publicize your business. 

If possible, build your own website, or 

make use of social media and local forums. 

> Advertise events and special promotions 
to attract people to your business. 

> Share news stories about your business, 
such as interesting events, new products 
and services, or notable achievements. 


> Create online profiles of yourself and 
staff to give your business a human face. 
Update them regularly and use them to 
promote the business. 


Generating media coverage is a vital PR tool in order to 
reach your audience. For example, a journalist or online 
influencer writing about your business will give you 
valuable, free publicity. When launching your business, 
publicize the story behind your brand, and why you 
launched it (see pp.62—63). Plan events, such as open 
days, enter for relevant trade or community awards, 
and share interesting news stories about your 
business. Take advantage of free internet monitoring 
services, such as Google Alerts, to keep track of any 
media mentions, as well as to follow competitors. 


© 


BECOME PART OF 
THE COMMUNITY 


People like to support their communities, 
including local businesses, which you can 
benefit from - as part of the community. 


> Organise open days, where the public 
can meet you and your staff, and see 
what your business offers. 

» Join local business groups and contribute 
to the local area. Share your involvement. 

> Sponsor local activities and initiatives, 
and attend shows and events. Help raise 
funds for local good causes and charities. 


crrmecem® 136/137 


good PR better 2 FEO 


front page ad. Mi 


Sir Richard Branson, entrepreneur Japanese retailer MUj has been 


consistent in telling its “no brand” 
story through channels other than 
advertising. The company relies on 


Spreading the word publicity, in-store events, lectures 

; oe that explain the thinking behind its 
Generating publicity need not be expensive, especially if products, and word of mouth. This 
your customer base is local. Identify your target customers i quiet approach reflects the MUJ| 
(see pp.40-41) and develop publicity and PR activities with brand. The effect has been to set 
them in mind. Most people like promotions, with special MUJI apart from its competitors and 
deals and free giveaways, but some may respond better create a loyal following. MUJI now has 
to information via direct mail, whereas others are likely to stores from Singapore to New York. 


prefer social media posts. Here are some ways to generate 
publicity and get people talking about your new business. 


BE CREATIVE BE THE FACE OF 


The point of PR is to get people interested YOUR BUSINESS 

in, and talking about, your business. Think As business owner, you are central to 
of quirky ways to promote your brand that your brand. Use your knowledge and 
will capture the attention of others. enthusiasm to generate positive PR. 


> Create posters and flyers that will > Engage with local media and develop 
amuse or inspire those who see them. a good relationship. Invite them to events, 
Make them available online for people share stories, and send press releases. 
to share and repost. 


>» Become the expert in your field to raise 
> Occasionally offer novelty products your personal profile and give greater 
or services, unique to your business. credibility to your business. 
> Launch innovative competitions, such > Speak publicly at local and industry 
as local treasure hunts or online puzzles. events. Join and start campaigns. 


Advertising 


As well as promoting your business with marketing and PR activities, 
you can further increase your visibility by paying for advertising, using 
the medium best suited to your target audience. 


Choosing your channel the right means of communication for your target 
Once you have launched your business with a audience. For instance, if your message is for an 
promotion, paying for advertising can broaden your older demographic, traditional advertising in printed 
reach. In a competitive market, it is important to use publications or on the radio can be more effective, 


TRADITIONAL ADVERTISING 


PROS CONS 
/ 004° » Reaches local/specific target market, such » May be regarded as junk mail and discarded 
e as restaurant diners > Typically low response rate 
cm > Delivered directly to people's homes/offices 
DIRECT MAIL > Low cost 
> Fast publication process » Offers no control over ad placement 
» Themed specialty sections may allow for » Competition for attention with other material 
targeted advertising on page (including competitors) 
NEWSPAPERS » Can include coupons > Short shelf life and lower-quality printing 
‘ > Is often in circulation for months > Accurate circulation figures are hard to source 
{ Bi > Specialty titles and themed sections allow » Advance planning is necessary to secure slots 
we focused adverts > Is more costly than newspapers since it reaches 
MAGAZINES > Quality printing adds cachet to the brand amore targeted demographic 
iy > Inexpensive and easy production process > Listeners tend to “switch off” during adverts 
@:. > Useful for reaching a target audience ) Frequent adverts are required for an impact 
» Good for creating immediate sales > Increased competition and higher cost for “rush 
RADIO hour” slots 
> Highly visible, clear message, seen > Format limits message length 
1 repeatedly at all times > Competition for prime sites 
ts } Reaches people faster and more cheaply > Digital billboards are more effective, but much 
PAM i than other media more expensive than static billboards 
> Potential to impress with creative, > Limited audience numbers 
professional production ) Audience may enter cinema only after adverts 
> Captive audience are shown 
clnlect > High impact 
‘ > Offers local, national, and global reach > Generally more expensive than other channels 
{ ea > High impact with vision/sound » Repetition may cause viewer fatigue 
» Adds cachet to brand > Viewers may ignore or skip adverts on catch-up 


TELEVISION television/internet streaming 


GETTING GOING 
Advertising 


130¢ 10d 


although more expensive than online options, via 

the internet or mobile technology. Online advertising 
is more flexible, since it is not limited to a timed 
publication or broadcast. Response rates, which 

you need in order to figure out the return on your 
investment (ROI; see p.152), are also easier to 
accurately track with online advertising. Look at the 
pros and cons of each option to decide on the most 
effective and affordable way to reach your customers. 


US consumers 
adverts influence 
purchase 


How Consumers View Advertising, Clutch, 2017 


ONLINE ADVERTISING 
PROS 


> Relatively affordable. Requires good software 
and a list of email addresses 


CONS 


> Building a mailing list takes time; buying one in 
can be expensive 


4 N 
\ ) 
wy > Offers ability to send out bulk emails 


ADVERTSEMAILED Easy to track the response rate 
IN NEWSLETTERS 


» Adverts may not reach the right audience 
>» Emails can be deleted or marked as spam 


PAY-PER-CLICK 


» Affordable, since you pay only when someone 
clicks on the ad 


> Can be visually eye-catching and build 
brand awareness 


>» No guarantee that website users will click 


» Ad-blocking tools can prevent users from 
seeing adverts 


> Lower click-through rate than pay-per-click 


ANUCRERAE > Makes it easy to target special interests/topics adverts on search engines (paid search ads) 
VON > Similarly affordable, since search engine charges } Requires lots of testing to establish most 
i } only when visitors click on the ad effective key words 
\ === J 
NA » Success is the number of clicks so easy to track No guarantee that those who click will buy 
Feutemane > Higher click-through rate than for other > No direct correlation between budget and 
SING pay-per-click banner and display adverts results 
» Generally cheap to develop > Creating a consistent advertising campaign for 
Ql > Quick and easy to track ad effectiveness different screen sizes and systems is tricky 
: we : and can be costly 
> Can target specific demographic groups, thanks : : 
MOBILE to geo-location technologies » Users may be annoyed by the intrusion 
ADVERTISING ean : ‘ maven 
> Can engage individually with users > Negative experiences are quickly shared 
7 oN > Sponsoring a social media influencer who > Large followings do not necessarily guarantee 
{ * ) connects with your target audience raises high engagement 
yy awareness of your brand > The appeal of influencers—especially 
SOCIAL MEDIA » A positive mention of your product or celebrities—can fluctuate 
SPONSORSHIP service encourages brand loyalty 
5 > Easy to target a specific audience » Continual posts and updates can distract user 
_~_ > Increased brand visibility and recognition attention away from placed adverts 
> Cheaper than conventional advertising » Requires constant monitoring to maintain users’ 
SOCIAL MEDIA interest and find new users 


ADVERTS 


Making the Most 
of Social Media 


Thanks to social media, your business can engage with existing and 
potential customers anytime, anywhere. To make the most of it, you 
need to target the right platforms and use the most effective strategies. 


Picking the right sites 
Start by deciding what you want 
to achieve on social media, such as 
building your brand, reaching new 
customers, or engaging better with 
existing ones. Review the platforms 
your competitors use and why; this 
will help you decide which are most 
relevant for you and may inspire 
new ideas. To further guide your 
choices, ask your customers which 
platforms they use, and compare 
any profile you have built up of 
them—plus of those you aim to 
attract—to the user demographic 
information found in the business 
tools on most popular platforms. 
Once you have decided your plan, 
you need to bring it to life. Start by 
creating compelling content, such 
as posts, images, or videos, and 
post it on the most appropriate 
platforms (see right). 


Creating a strong profile 
Begin by choosing a username, 
which starts with the @ symbol, 
called a “social media handle,” for 
instance, @mycompanyname. Aim 
for a strong, consistent username 
across all platforms and ideally one 
that matches your website domain 
name (see p.114). Use the same logo 
or personal photograph across all 
platforms, too, so that your business 
is easily recognized. Then, add an 
attention-grabbing summary of the 
business and keep it updated. 


EXTEND BUSINESS REACH 


> Target the maximum number 
of users who see your content. 


> Use hashtags—“#” followed by 
words with no spaces, such as 
#hotdog—to create phrases that 
are easy to search for, including 
your business name. 


> Encourage engagement, using 


likes, comments, and shares. 


Choose the right social media 


Six key sites; look out for new ones, too. 


) Facebook—use to showcase your 
products and services. 


> Instagram-—share videos and photos, 
and engage with customers. 


» Snapchat—post to 12-34 age group, 
and offer discounts and promo codes. 


> Twitter—post breaking news, 
announcements, and promotions. 


> LinkedIn—post professional content, 
as well as jobs, to build credibility. 


» YouTube—post educational and 
instructional videos. 


EXISTING CUSTOMERS 
Engaging with existing customers 
can result in repeat sales and 
greater loyalty. 


aking ne mos arsocaiesa 140/141 


(J MAKING IT WORK 


> Use free online tools and analytics (see pp.212-215) initially to track and 
measure performance of social media interactions. 

) Respond to any negative comments on sites in a positive way, and avoid 
defensive or inflammatory replies. 

) Add your social networking profile links to your website, email signature, 
promotional materials, stationery, and business cards. 


Follow the trends 


Invest in advertising If you have a website 


> Identify “influencers”—people with 
a large social media following—in 
areas relevant to your business and 
that best match your brand. 


> Subscribe to social media blogs 
(online articles and commentaries) 
to learn about the latest trends. 


> Look online at Google Trends for 
a broad view of the topics that are 


> Choose the most relevant > Link to your website 
platform to your business and store, which is where 
customers, and try to steer users, customer sales are 
or “traffic,” to your own website. actually made. 

> Use online ads that target buyers > Keep website content 
by geography, shopping patterns, up to date, with news, 
personal interests, and other blogs, new products, 
demographic pointers. and trends. 


> Create compelling offers to attract > Promote website content, 


the most searched for online. attention and customer interaction. such as blog posts and 
> Join relevant online forums to see > Make sure ads have a clear, simple images, on your social 

what members are talking about and graphic design, punchy memorable media platforms to 

interested in. Start and lead threads headlines, or both. generate website traffic. 


> Encourage the sharing of 
website content on social 
media by adding “sharing” 
tools to web pages that link 
to Facebook, Instagram, 
and other sites. 


on subjects involving your business. 


POTENTIAL CUSTOMERS 
Raising your profile will attract new 
customers, who may spread the 
word about you. 


“Your Business 


As the owner of a start-up, you need to make connections so that your business 
becomes better known and builds some support. As your business grows, these 
connections may become mutually beneficial relationships. 


Meeting in person 
Online technology provides plenty 
of good ways to connect, and video- 
conferencing platforms have come 
into their own since the global 
pandemic. Apps such as Zoom, 
Microsoft Teams, Google Hangout, 
and Skype offer facilities for people 
around the world to see each other 
in real time, host meetings, share 
visuals, and vote on decisions. 
However, where possible, 
face-to-face contact, especially 
when meeting someone for the first 
time, is an easier way to establish a 
rapport with someone. A significant 
part of communication is body 
language; being able to see and 


There are some important ways in 
which you can make your face-to-face 
networking more successful. 


> Dress appropriately. 


> Listen carefully to the people 
you meet to find shared 
interests. Then, politely move 
on to meet others. 

> Aim to develop relationships 
rather than sell something. 

> Exchange a well-designed 
business card with people 
you want to connect with. 

> Follow up with an email or 
connection via social media. 


interpret a person’s reactions 
helps both understanding and 
the flow of conversation. It is also 
a better way to build credibility 
and establish trust. 

Face-to-face networking need 
not be daunting. Think about it as 
a way to gain personal exposure, 
which will create opportunities and 
grow the business. Set a goal to 
meet more people, have meaningful 
interactions, and build personal 
and professional relationships. 

Look for professional networking 
events as well as special interest 
groups and associations linked to 
your area of business where you 


can go along and make connections. 


Veejay Nahar-Watson 
Managing Director 
Any Business 
vnaharwatson@ 
anybusiness.com 
www.anybusiness.com 
1-234-567-8910 


Networking to Build 


Maintaining relationships 
Networking is not just about 
seeking out new contacts. Imagine 
two lists. The first is your target list, 
containing people to get to know, 
or types of people to connect with, 
for example, influencers in your 
sector. The second list contains 

all your current contacts. Choose 
the relationships to maintain and 
strengthen, and plan to havea 
weekly coffee or phone call with 

at least one of these people. Do not 
assume anything; asking open 
questions may reveal connections. 
Always aim to help contacts as far 
as possible, even if it is just 
emailing a link to an article. 


eo MAKING IT WORK 


> Nurture and maintain your 
current contacts by staying in 
touch, but do not add people 
to your email list without 
their permission. 


> Trust remains the basis of any 
relationship, so be sure to follow 
through on any offers to share 
information that you make when 
you meet someone. 


> Inform your contacts when you 
are launching a new product or 
service and seek input from those 
with relevant experience. 


Networking to Sree 142 / (| A3 ))) 


How to network in person 


Consider people, from peers in the same sector to industry experts, 
who would make good connections. Face-to-face opportunities (a) 

include breakfast meetings, conferences, and business clubs; joining 

a regular group is more likely to result in enduring relationships. (@) 


Be interested 


Curiosity and a genuine 
interest in the other person 
is the start of any 
worthwhile relationship. 
Converse equally, share 
information, and be 
authentic in all interactions. 


Make friends early 


Most people want to give 
someone starting out a 
helping hand, so begin 
networking as soon as 

you can, and quickly 
build relationships with 
your peers. 


Build your list 


Gradually compile a list of 
contacts, and identify 
those that could be helpful 
to you. These are not 
necessarily the most 
senior; consider those 
likely to be mutually 
supportive also. 


Be helpful 


Think of networking 
as trading. Have some ways 
in which to help 
others, such as offering 
recommendations, useful 
information, or 
professional contacts. 


Encouraging 
Customer Loyalty 


Building a base of loyal customers or clients will help you generate a 
steady, sustainable income stream and bolster sales in times of uncertainty. 
Faithful customers who refer others to you also help boost your business. 


Understanding loyalty 
Some customers and clients will 
come back regularly to you because 
you are familiar and they are short 
of time. It takes more effort and 
they could feel like they are taking 
more of a risk to find a new place. 
Other customers might buy from 
you because you have the cheapest 
prices, but they may easily be lured 
away by a discounting competitor. 
These customers are hard to keep 


loyal, but if you back up sales with 
great customer service, you will at 
least receive some positive reviews. 
The most loyal customers will be 
those who value the quality of your 
product, service, or brand and who 
enjoy the experience of purchasing 
through your business. Gathering 
and acting on feedback from your 
customers (see box, right) will 
improve your interaction with them; 
that, in turn, will help boost loyalty. 


Promoting referrals 

A loyal customer base can, in effect, 
become an extra promotional arm 
for your business. Market research 
shows that up to 85 percent of 
consumers trust online reviews as 
much as they do word-of-mouth 
referrals. The challenge is to 
persuade loyal customers to take 
the step of either telling other 
people about your business or 
brand or leaving an online review. 


77% of consumers say 
they stayed loyal to specific 
brands for 10 years or more 


www.inmoment.com, 2018 


Creating a bond 


It is easy for most customers and clients to 
research products, brands, and service providers 
online, so they will have high expectations. 
Attentive, personalized customer service is a vital 
tool in holding on to customers and developing 
an emotional connection with them. 

Key to this emotional bond is making memories 
for the customer as they interact with you. 
Remembering names, making transactions 
surprisingly straightforward, and offering 
customers something special can all be 
memorable. In short, make sure that every 
aspect of the customer experience is positive, 
eliminating any negatives. 


A referral program, such as offering 


a discount for the customer who 


refers a friend, as well as a discount 


for the friend, can be effective in 
promoting recommendations. 
Ask customers and clients to 


leave an online review if they have 


had a positive experience. Invite 
them to do so when they are at 
their happiest—this is typically 
just after they have received the 
product or service you have sold 
them. Offering a prize or some 
sort of incentive may encourage 
customers or clients to respond. 


Encouraging Customer Lovaty L4G / 147 


Gathering information about what customers need and want can enable 
a business to improve products and services, thereby building loyalty. 


> Simple surveys can be 
sent by email, with statements 
evaluated on a scale of 1 to 10. 


> If your business has an app, 
insert one or two pop-up questions 
relevant to the page the customer 
is currently on. 

> Live chat on your website allows 
customers to ask questions and 
be asked for their opinions. 


> Post prompt replies to negative 
reviews and offer to remedy 
complaints immediately. 


> When face-to-face with 
customers, ask about their needs 
and note what they say. 


>» Monitor website activity: how 
long do visitors spend on your 
website, what do they click on, 
and how often do they return? 


Enhancing the customer experience 


To earn the loyalty of your customers and clients, try to ensure that 
every step in the consumer journey is as convenient and enjoyable 


after-sales service. 


Offering engaging 
content 
Engage customers with 
your products and 
services by giving them 
useful information or 
inspiring them. This will 
encourage them to keep 
coming back to you, 
giving you an edge 
over competitors. 


Insider offers and 
social action 


Rewarding loyal 
customers with gifts and 
discounts is one 
approach to earning 
loyalty. Alternatively, 
supporting a cause or 
community the 
customer cares about 
will also engage them. 


as possible, from ease of finding products and hassle-free 
purchasing to prompt, reliable delivery and excellent 


Managing 
expectations 
When it comes to the 
logistics of delivery in 
particular, customers 
appreciate being kept 
informed of when their 
product or service will 
be delivered and what 
level of quality and 
service to expect. 


Outstanding 
customer service 


Consistent, thoughtful 
customer service is 
important in building 
loyalty. This might 
include speedy 
personalized replies to 
customer emails or 
trying to exceed your 
clients’ expectations. 


Building Customer 
Relationships 


All customers and clients are valuable to your business—especially 
those who return, support your brand, and advocate it to others, which 
you can encourage by building strong relationships. 


Keeping customers satisfied products and services that meet those needs, 

Anyone who buys products or services from your then promote them in the most appropriate way 

business is valuable, although some customers and to reach your target audience. 

clients are more valuable to you than others. While To build relationships with your customers and 

those who make single, one-off purchases have value, clients, get to know them. Speak to them face-to-face, 

the best are those who not only return, but who also engage with them on social media (see pp.140-141), 

support and recommend your business to others. and use a customer data system (see pp.130-131). 
While some people will only ever make a single You can then use what you learn to ensure that your 

purchase, you can encourage others to develop products and services not only meet their expectations, 

stronger bonds with your business. The first step but exceed them. Prove to them that they can trust and 

is to understand who they are and what they need rely on you through the quality of your offering, 

(see pp.40—41). Once you know this, you can create customer service, and aftercare. 


Communication 
and campaigns 


Use marketing campaigns 
specifically aimed at your target 
customers (see pp.140-141) to 
build interest in the products 

or services you offer. 


How to build 
relationships 


Building relationships with your customers 
and clients is a gradual process that starts 
with your business appearing relevant to 
them. Once you have caught their attention, 
you need to inspire sufficient interest 
for them to make a purchase. From 
this point, use your understanding of 
your customers or clients to develop 
and sustain good relationships. 


Single purchase \ 


The customer knows 
more about you and 
what you offer, which 
appeals to them 
enough to make 


a purchase. y 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Building Customer Relationships 148 / 149 ))) 


iv NEED TO KNOW 


Customer service and experience are key areas where 


: : > Customer experience > Loyalty programs 

your business can compete. While some customers and management is the encourage return 
clients will be impressed by a flashy website or stylish tools and processes a business, offering rewards 
premises, all appreciate feeling valued and cared for, business uses to manage EO USES 
which requires time and thought—not money. and improve interactions based on the amount 

Regularly review how you interact with your customers with its customers. they spend. 
and clients, and how well. Think about every aspect of > Customer journey > “Sticky” customers are 
your business, and the products or services you offer, describes the entire loyal consumers who 
from your customers’ perspectives. What would they purchasing lifecycle, from return to your business 
think? How would they rate you? Are you better than initial interest, through to make more purchases. 


your rivals? Then think about your customers and what 
matters to them. Why do they buy from you? What do 
they come back? Pay attention to the smaller details, eeeccccccccee eeceees eeeenece eee e nec cece ae cscersccccanscacs 
as it is often the little things that people notice and 


appreciate - and remember. “It takes months to find 
a customer... seconds to 


purchase, to aftercare. 


You can also target your marketing more effectively | ” 
by offering tailored promotions, and communicate ose O n e. 
with your customers or clients as valued individuals. Vince Lombardi, American football coach 


Support and service 


Engage with your customers as 
individuals and give excellent, 
personalized service. Offer 
guarantees and good aftercare 
service to inspire confidence. 


Valued customer 


The customer begins 
to feel valued and 
makes regular 
purchases in 
preference to other 
businesses. 


Working with 
Other Businesses 


As a new business owner, it can be well worth seeking mutually 
beneficial relationships—with your suppliers and also with companies 
whose goods or services complement what your business offers. 


Collaborating with others 

Although your business must compete against its 
rivals, it can benefit from good partnerships with other 
companies whose interests align with yours. As every 
business has its own strengths and weaknesses, a 
collaboration with another company may help fill a gap 


in your business model or provide a service that you 
need. For example, if you repair cellphones but lack 
direct access to customers, it could be mutually 
beneficial to partner with a retailer who sells phone 
accessories and has space available. Alternatively, you 
may be a start-up whose innovative product or service. 


Types of alliances 


Working with other businesses can help support your 

start-up—by securing goods or services that you need or by 

providing something that complements or fills a gap in your 

business model. However, the partners and 

suppliers you choose must be right for | | | 


your business, and you will need 
to work with them to sustain 


the relationships. Any 
agreement must benefit 
the business; if it does 
not, be prepared 

to walk away 

if necessary. 


PARTNERSHIPS 


4 J 


To develop a successful partnership, you will need to work with a business whose 
products or services complement what your start-up is offering, helping to draw in 
new customers and provide extra value to existing customers. Whether you are 
looking at companies in the same industry or ones who provide a service, such as 
web design and maintenance, plan carefully before you enter a partnership, and 
consider the following tips on what to do and what to avoid doing: 


) Choose a partner that meets your 
criteria, such as their financial status, 
willingness, goals, and personality. 

> Formalize the agreement, recording 
what each party expects and offers. 

> Set realistic expectations to ensure 
that they are met as agreed. 

> Maintain communication and discuss 
any problems early, so you can take swift 

remedial action. 


> Limit partners by location, as the best 
may be on the other side of the world. 


> Accept the first offer; instead negotiate 
for the deal that suits all parties the most. 


>» Be tempted by size, as the biggest 
partner might offer more opportunities, 
but these may not be right for you. 

> Ignore issues, as they are unlikely to 
disappear. Timely, shared resolutions 
can strengthen a relationship. 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Working with Other Businesses 1 5OQ jf 1 bh i} ))) 


POPC OO ROTH STORE HEHE OTEEEHETOTEESS ESOT EEEHESEE STEHT EEE ESOSE HE SESEEO RE EESESOHEESEO EEO SEEEEES 


attracts the support of a larger company. Working with A 
another business can give you fresh ideas and expand NEED TO KNOW 


your experience. You should also build excellent 
relationships with suppliers to enable you to work 


> Horizontal alliances occur between businesses that 
are in the same industry, and who may have been 


together to support each other’s business long term. competitors, but have decided to work together. 

. . > Vertical alliances are partnerships between businesses 
Forming alliances at different stages in the same supply chain; working 
The Internet and social media have made it easier to with a supplier is a common example. 


find potential partners, but be sure to discuss your 
plans in detail before you commit to a collaboration. 


seneeses 


eee meses esesesseessseesasessessssessessesessaness 


Explain to any prospective business partner what you binding contract, a clear, written agreement will help 
want to gain from the relationship, and weigh up what ‘to avoid any misunderstandings and will underline 
is expected in return — it is vital to agree on shared the strategic objective you both aim to achieve. 


outcomes. While you do not need to create a legally 


TT TT a 
>" am 
B 


SUPPLIERS 


(o) (eo) 


Strong supplier relationships are critical for the long-term success of your business, 
but it may be prudent to have more than one supplier if your company is dependent 
ona single item. Examples of ways in which suppliers can impact a small business 
include the quality of goods and services; the timeliness/reliability of deliveries; 
competitiveness and innovation; and financial implications/payment terms. Here 
are some simple ways to ensure mutually beneficial supplier relationships: 


> Develop personal relationships, as 
suppliers value familiar customers 
and are more likely to deal fairly with 
those that they know and trust. 

> Share information with a supplier, 
particularly on critical lead times (and 
that way you will avoid surprises). 

> Agree and stick to all terms, and 
especially those regarding payments. 


> Cancel orders without plenty of notice, 
and do so only when unavoidable. 


> Forget your supplier is also in business 
and therefore needs to fulfill their own 
objectives and make a profit. 


> Play one supplier off against another 
to secure an advantage, as both may 
eventually cease to trade with you. 


Is Your Marketing 
Leading to Sales? 


Marketing is vital but can be costly. Assess the effectiveness 


of your marketing activities, and monitor where most of your 
sales are being made to ensure that your campaigns count. 


Investing in marketing 
Marketing is a creative process, and it is often viewed 
as being one of the most exciting parts of the business. 


However, since several factors can cause an increase in 


sales, the effectiveness of your marketing campaigns 
can seem hard to measure. For example, after 
delivering new flyers locally, you need to be sure 
that any subsequent increase in trade was not simply 
the result of more people moving to the area. 

You need to view marketing as an investment 
and understand which marketing approach will best 
engage with customers and drive sales, particularly 
since marketing is an ongoing and cumulative process. 


Measuring success 
Even for start-ups, digital marketing is an affordable 
and valuable option, and there are many free online 
analytical tools available (see pp.212—215) to measure 
its effectiveness, such as Google Analytics, which 
you can set up online without specialized knowledge. 
These record data such as the number of new visitors 
to a website, number of page views, clicks on paid ads, 
and the rate at which sales have been made. Offline 
campaigns can also be measured by counting response 
rates to flyers and ads featuring discount codes. 

As well as measuring the response rate to marketing 
activities, you need to assess the financial return. 
To do this, look at a specific time period, and divide 
your total marketing spend by the number of new 
customers attracted. This gives a figure known as the 
customer acquisition cost (CAC). Next, estimate how 
much money an average customer will spend with you 
over their lifetime, the customer lifetime value (CLV): 
to do this, multiply the product value by the number of 
times it is purchased, then multiply this by the average 
customer life span. If it costs $200 to acquire each 
customer, who will spend only $20 over their lifetime, 
you will need to review your campaign. 


6. FINE-TUNE 
Use customer feedback and 
your market research to 
fine-tune your product, 
promotional messages, 
sales, and service. 


2 
v 


5. GIVE GREAT SERVICE 
Build on the relationship, 
turning the sale into repeat 
purchases, word-of-mouth 
recommendations, 
and loyalty. 


WN 


The marketing cycle 


The marketing process should begin with a good 
understanding of your customers’ needs. Using this 
information, you can adjust your offering and craft a 
strong marketing message. Give great service to keep 
customers engaged, and use their feedback to hone 
your marketing campaigns. 


—, 


so 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS / 3 ))) 
Is Your Marketing Leading to Sales? 1 52 1 5 


1. RESEARCH 

Get to know your customers, 
product, market area, 

and competitors. 


Looking at overall sales may not 
provide all the information 
necessary for you to make the 
best marketing decisions. Here 

are some ways to look at sales 
from different perspectives; they 
will help determine the best areas 
in which to invest marketing funds. 


> Keep records for each day, 
week, month, quarter, and year, 
and compare with previous 
time periods. 


> Break figures down to 
understand the bestselling 
products or services. 


2. CUSTOMIZE 
Adapt your product, price, 
and distribution to suit 
your customers’ needs 
and your market. 


“Email 


> Identify which customers make 
the most/largest purchases. 


> Record sales made to new and 


marketing 

has the highest te orn aanser 
oe preparer es 
invest ment face retail or online transactions. 
for small 


businesses.” 


Campaign Monitor, 2019 


3. MARKET 
Create and communicate 
your message to your 
intended customers to 
interest and attract them. 


As a business owner, you can 
collect sales data from many 
different sources (see pp.154-155). 
However, in order for it to provide 
meaningful information, it needs 
to be organized and analyzed. 

For example, data such as a list of 
customers who bought a particular 
item does not reveal anything, but 
when organized by source, it could 
reveal that most sales were made 
to new customers. Use simple 
spreadsheets to analyze data. 


LLLLLLL 44, 
9 


4. SELL 
Close the sale with your 
customer, ensuring the 
process is hassle-free. 


2 
ey jp 


Yep, 
trey” 


Analyzing Business 
Performance 


You need to keep checks on which parts of your start-up are working 
as you had hoped they would and which are not. Using key performance 
indicators (KPIs) gives you helpful snapshots of your business in action. 


Understanding KPIs Too many KPIs—or poorly chosen employees, perhaps displaying 
KPIs are targets that you set for ones—will overwhelm you with them as a “dashboard” (see below). 
crucial business areas, such as unhelpful data. Ideally, start witha Clearly defining KPIs and how they 


marketing, sales, and finance, and small number that relate directly to will be measured—whether as 
against which you check progress your business plan and the aspects quantities or as ratios or 
regularly (weekly, monthly, or most likely to bring success. percentages—will ensure that 
quarterly). Set your KPIs carefully. Communicate your KPIs to your everyone understands them. 


The KPI dashboard 


When sharing the KPls for your business, 
the best way is to display them graphically. 


You can either do this manually but m™N Ps. 
drawing a simple chart or even just write 

them as percentages on a poster. Marketing 

Alternatively, make use of free online > Company website The level of traffic 


software to create digital “dashboard”. 
However you present your KPIs, use 
them as a tool to motivate yourself 
and your staff by highlighting 
areas of success and where 
improvements are required. 


> Internet Keywords in top 10 search results 


> Social media Levels of sharing, liking, 
and retweeting of posts 


> Email campaigns Percentage of 
customers responding and buying goods 


) Advertising Units sold 
per $1,000 investment 


AN AA 


Sales y y Customer satisfaction 


) Customer lifetime value Total amount > Turnover Proportion of customers 
of money generated by the average customer , making repeat sales or continuing a service 


> Upselling Percentage of product buyers y >) Website New visits to a site versus 
who also take a service package f repeat visits 
>) Conversion time How long it takes } ) Feedback Percentage of high-scoring 
to close asale i ; . customer reviews 
> Regional sales What is selling » > Complaints Ratio of complaints 
where and in what quantity . to number of customers 


pa secapisinon votes ASSAM ADO 


Make targets realistic, neither so SWOT ANALYSIS 

high that they are unachievable nor 

so low that they hold back growth. SWOT asks open-ended questions to address the strengths, weaknesses, 
Updating your KPIs regularly will opportunities, and threats influencing a business. Identifying these factors 
stop them from becoming obsolete can help you understand their positive or negative impacts on performance. 
(you may need to drop some and 


devise new ones as your business >» Strengths What is your business > Opportunities What external 


; best at? Does it have any intellectual changes can your business exploit? 
evolves). A good set of KPIs will act property (see pp.96-97), special Do competitors have weaknesses 
as a compass and show you whether skills, or financial resources? that could benefit your business? 
you are on course to meet your goals. > Weaknesses What is your business =) Threats What might competitors 

SWOT analysis (see box, right) not good at? Why do people not do that could impact your business? 
is another useful tool. It identifies like/buy its products? Does it rely on How might changing social or 
internal and external factors that outdated technology? Is it missing shopping trends undermine your 
could affect the performance of strategic alliances (see pp.150-51)? business plan and affect profits? 


your business as a whole. 


Employees 
> Employee satisfaction Proportion of 
satisfied staff as indicated by surveys 
> Staff turnover Percentage leaving over 
time (high turnover rates are costly) 


> Absence and sickness Average work 
days lost per staff member 


__ ) Health and safety Number of 
accidents at work 


AN Ps 


Operations Financial 


>» Products Percentage of product defects >) Customer payments Percentage 
of customers paying on time 


) Output How many units produced ‘ 
per operating hour/day \ > Expenses payments Proportion of 


} Efficiency Percentage of tasks or invoices paid in 30 days, 90 days, etc. 


deliveries completed in the allocated time ‘ \ » Profit margins Gross and net profit 


Overheads Aciialice of compared to desired levels 


energy, water, and rent against FO! \ ) Inventory turnover Time 
budgeted use 10} | taken to offload stock 


Maintaining 
Momentum 


Once you are up and running, it is vital to maintain momentum. Developing 
your business is an ongoing process—you will need to keep researching ideas, 
building products, seeking new markets, and growing your customer base. 


Continual development chances of achieving it, set yourself 

In order to achieve the objectives goals and measure the results. For 

you set in your business plan (see example, you might aim to reduce == C 
pp.104-105), which can be months the cost of your materials by 10 

or even years ahead, take steps to percent within the first year of Develop 
maintain your business momentum. operating, or to attract a new contacts 

This means constantly trying to customer group within 6 months. Attend workshops and 
improve what you do and how you events, listen and ask 
do it and looking for ways to questions, use networking 
reduce costs and increase profits. Making it happen resources such 

It also involves searching for new as LinkedIn. 


products and services to offer and Maintaining momentum is important in all 


improving those you already have. aspects of your business but critical in your \ 


in ( ; : marketing activities. Customers can easil 
This is particularly important with ee y 
lose interest and be tempted away by 


your marketing activities, which competitive rivals, so continually developing 
play a significant role in attracting —_ and perfecting your marketing is essential. 


customers and sales. Here are some examples of different Identify 

There is no specific process to approaches you could take. partners 
maintaining momentum. Instead, Collaborate with 
treat it as a fundamental objective, businesses that enhance 
and share it with everyone involved your brand; look for sales 


channel and supplier 


in your business. To improve your aN 
opportunities. 


0 
©) maxincirwork / 


> Borrow ideas from successful rivals to improve how 
your business operates. Read trade articles in the media 
to discover the approaches they used. 


1 
I 


> Share the need to maintain momentum with 
everyone involved within the business in a simple 
statement. Use it as a reminder for them and yourself. 

> Do not be blinded by short-term success, which can 
easily vanish unless you continually improve and 
develop your business. 


COSCO ESS HR DECOR ESS OHRSSHHHESHEESSOHESSEHESSESESSSESESEEES 


RowNvamenng Momentum LOO / 157 


Createa 
marketing plan 


Build a calendar of 
activities with deadlines 
for advertisements, 
events, trade shows, and 
online activity. 


Apply 
for awards 
Apply for relevant 
sector and local awards. 
This is useful for PR, 
building customer trust, 
and motivating staff. 


Develop 
loyalty/referrals 
programs 


°c —> 9 
GC Ga ¢ 


Schedule 
offers 
Plan regular deals, 
often linked to promotions, 
such as free trials, 
discounts, two-for-ones, 
and coupons. 


J 


Master 
sales 
Know your target customer, 
design campaigns, 
capture customer 
information, and generate 
sales leads. 


Review, 
measure, and 
improve 


Set goals, regularly 
review them, and build on 
whatever works best. 


Retain existing customers 
and acquire new ones by 
offering incentives. 


Regularly reviewing your products and services and developing new ones is one of the most effective ways to improve 
what your business offers customers. It can be costly and risky but also rewarding. Here are some points to consider: 


> Keep lists of potential productideas =) Analyze the market, looking at > Test the market by trying out the 
from customers, family, competitors, trends and your competition to new offering on customers who fit 


and articles in the media. assess any new opportunity and your target audience profile. 


> Test concepts, offering samples to its potential sales. > Launch the product using social 
customers or testing new serviceson } Develop the product, using media, email newsletters, and 
selected clients to see whether an customer or client feedback as well seasonal fairs to kick-start sales. 
idea is worth pursuing. as any relevant market analysis. 


Managing Your 
Finances 


Ongoing financial management is essential to make sure your business 
has the funds it needs, when it needs them. This means you must 
maintain accurate financial records from the beginning. 


Keeping records loss statement (also see pp.88-89). expense. For example, selling an 
Effective financial management Before you begin selling, you will asset creates a one-off lump sum, 
relies on accurate bookkeeping, need a system to record allsources whereas regular transactions better 
(see pp.88-—89). This allows you to of income and expense. You can indicate income. Similarly, buying 
see how much money the business either do this manually or by using an asset is a one-off cost, whereas 
has at any time. It is all-important online software. You should also regular expenses give a clearer 
when calculating your profit and record the type of income or picture of your outgoings. 


cit can change over 


Understanding 
business costs 


There are two types of business costs: 
fixed costs (also called overheads) 

and variable costs. Fixed costs are 

the same no matter what business 
activities occur. This makes them easy 
to predict and account for. However, 
being fixed, they are difficult to 
reduce. In contrast, variable costs 
relate directly to business activities 

so can go up and down. This makes 
them harder to predict at first, but you 
may be better able to do so over time. 
As variable costs relate to business 
activities, you can take steps to reduce 
them when necessary. 


{1s a set expert \Se for our business bu 
y ’ 


ig cos . 
This es include: 


time. Exampl Insurance costs on 
Rent or mo nthly our Py ae 4 
i mortgage costs, id NS oe premium, 
which have ae for the duration ° tcan vary 
rates change, tne ysually ayea- The cos 


interest : 
When In neither go from year to year. 


amount you pay cal 
up or down. 


per manent 


Wages for 
| in 
Licenses ‘© play music staff must be voymert 
i ith emp 
ell alcohol are line wi i 
‘cssential for hospitality contracts. AS staff numbers a! 


e. 
nts, ay will chang 
businesses: such as restaur? the ammount you P Y 


hotels, and bars: 


Making predictions 

Keeping clear, ongoing records over 
time will help you predict your 
expenditure and income. This is 
important to help you plan ahead 
for seasonal variations in trade, 
when sales may decline or costs 
rise. It can also help you forecast 
profit or loss projections—how 
much money your business may 
make or lose in the future—which 
is valuable for long-term planning. 
Accurate forecasts are essential if 
you are seeking external finance or 
presenting to potential investors. 


This cost fluctuates in 


can predict it. Examples include: 


Material costs 
relate to how much of 
4 Product you make or 


ane example, the ingredients 
used ina food-related business, 


Utilities (ga5 Water 
electricity) are partly 
fixed costs, since you 
have to use them, They are also 
variable, as cost varies accordin 
to how much you consume. 5 


line with busines 


the numb 
These will chan 
to your needs. 


Commission to 
re. referral sites and 
h 


platform 


Cost to online sellers. Some 
May even see it asa fixed cost 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Managing Your Finances 


Exactly how you keep records will 
depend on you and your business. 
However, there are many online 
tools available for little or no cost. 
The key thing is to choose a system 
that works and to stick with it. You 
need to maintain thorough records, 
especially if you take cash or 
electronic payments. 

Keep receipts for all business 
costs and expenses. It is harder 
to look for missing items at the end 
of the tax year than it is to file them 
on a regular basis. 


S activities, although you 


Hourly wages fo; 
temporary staff may 
be at aset rate, but 
er of hours will not. 
8€ according 


third-party selling 
Scan be a significant 


158/159 


82% 


of businesses 
fail because of 
inconsistent 
or insufficient 
cash flow 


www.smallbizgenius.net, 2020 


KA NEED TO KNOW 


> Business costs are those directly 
incurred in the running of a 
company, such as stationery, 
materials, and equipment. 


> Prospective costs are those 
that may occur in the future. 
These cannot be accounted 
for until they arise, but they 
can be predicted. 


> Questionable costs are those 
that can be fixed or variable. This 
includes utilities, as the business 
must have them, although the 
cost of using them varies. 


) Depreciation is the gradual 
decrease in the value of an asset 
owned by the business. It is a 
fixed cost, as it counts as a loss 
on a profit and loss statement. 


Managing Budgets 
and Cash Flow 


Your start-up may have healthy sales, but without a regular inflow of cash, you 
will not have enough money to pay your bills. It is therefore vital to keep an 
eye on cash and to budget wisely to make sure you do not run out of funds. 


Managing budgets 


Cash is the lifeblood of your business. From the outset, 
make sure that you have a reliable system for tracking 
the money coming in and going out (see pp.88—89 

and pp.158—159). These figures give you the basis for 
estimating how much cash you will need at any one 
time to meet your expenses. Regularly comparing the 
actual money flowing in and out to the figures you 
estimated in your business plan budget will highlight 
any discrepancies. You can then adjust your budget 


and, if necessary, your spending. Keeping your fixed 
costs (such as rent) as low as possible at the start 
enables you to allocate most of your money and any 
profits to steady cash flow, and grow your business. 

Although some start-ups have access to cash 
reserves that enable them to run with a planned loss, 
most cannot. It is wise to keep a solid cash reserve 
aside to cover a potential unplanned loss that might 
otherwise be unsustainable. Running out of funds is 
one of the main reasons new businesses fail. 


How to improve 
cash flow | 


However good you are at generating 
new sales, maintaining cash flow 
should be your priority, since it 
enables you to pay your rent and 
wage bill at the end of each month. 
Ensuring that money flows into your 
business promptly and goes out only 
as necessary will determine the 
survival of your start-up. There are 
several ways of doing this, including 
invoicing immediately and chasing 
late payments. At times, it may help to 
sell goods at a discount, to run special 
offers, or to find ways to spread your 
business or supply costs. An accurate 
monthly cash flow statement, 
reporting the actual inflow and 
outflow of money, enables you 

to monitor the situation and 

decide which steps to take. 


> Increase sales by lowering prices or running special 
offers to encourage purchasers. 


Depending on the nature of your business, one or 
more of these steps may help maintain your cash flow. |_ 
> Invoice immediately, as soon as work is complete, 

to avoid unnecessary payment delays, or ask 

customers to pay a deposit or the full price upfront. 
> Chase late payments, setting up a process to ensure © 
that no payments are missed. Consider offering future 
discounts for early payments. 


> Generate cash by selling items of otherwise slow- 
selling stock at a large discount. 


flow. However, highly innovative 
companies, such as Netflix, 
Amazon, Uber, and Tesla, turned 
traditional financial advice upside 
down by failing to make a profit in 
their early years. Many technology 


companies now build loss-making 
operations into their plans. From 
an early stage, they are helped by 
large investors who seek long-term 
rewards. By contrast, most new 
businesses hoping to raise capital 
have to get a bank loan or find 
investors who may demand a 
significant share of their assets. 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Managing Budgets and Cash Flow 


160/161 


POPP OP OO TOTO EE HEH HCO EEEEH EOE SESS ESOT EEEHES EES EESEE EEE ESOEEEESEESEO PE EESESO ESE OEE OSEEEEES 


4 NEED TO KNOW 


> Burn rate measures how fast — aD Vw we 
a new business uses its capital 7 
before making a profit. 


> Financial deficit is a loss. It 


occurs when costs exceed the 
money coming into a business. 


’mount owed 


> Financial surplus is the same as 


to small 
profit, which occurs when income : — 
exceeds business expenses. busi nesses 


> Liquidity is the ability to turn Ago = li- 
earnings into cash. Eee 

> Net worth can be calculated by 
deducting the total liabilities of 
a business from its total assets. 


www.kochiesbusinessbuilders.com.au, 
2020 


Spreading your business's costs (both fixed and r | 
variable) can help smooth your cash flow. | 


_. ) Use acompany credit card to defer business costs 
and possibly earn rewards on what you spend. 
Pay suppliers on their terms, such as within 
30 days, to keep cash in your account for longer. 


> Review regular costs, exploring other suppliersto | 
find better terms, and seek one-off discounted offers. | 

> Limit the stock you hold by using accurate sales 

forecasts, and use suppliers who deliver quickly. 


Establishing 
a Culture 


Bringing a positive attitude and approach to your business right from 
the start will help motivate you and your staff. A shared culture will 
shape the personality of your business and how it operates. 


Deciding on your values 


The term “business culture” 


describes the approach and style 

of your business—it is how you and 
your staff operate on a daily basis. 
Cultures develop and evolve over 
time, although you can establish 


a set of values that reflect what 


you want the business to achieve 


from the beginning. You cannot 
dictate a culture—the people 


working for the business bring it 
to life. However, you may want to 
initiate a process that involves your 


staff and others connected to the 
business, including advisors or 
investors, to agree on a set of 
core values that are right for you. 
Choose simple, meaningful 
values (see pp.24—25), such as 
honesty and accountability, 


Creating the culture 


Start to shape a successful culture by leading all staff 
and others involved in the business in a simple 


shared process to define meaningful values. 


~ 4 
™ eS 


Get people 
talking 


Find out what matters to 
individuals. Look at how 
other businesses have 
expressed their values and 
consider what works well 
and what does not. 


y 
y 
™~ a ‘A 


Capture ideas 
and discuss 


No idea is a bad one. Write 
down all the ideas about 
positive values. Explore the 
values and how they might 
relate to your business. 


~ i 


Organize and 
rationalize ideas 


Group values together. Rank » 
them according to how much § 
difference they could make 
tothe business. Combine f 
similar values together until 
you have around 10 in all. 


rather than a list of buzzwords 
that are hard to interpret or uphold. 
Once you have chosen your values, 
you must incorporate them into 
your business practices and 
processes. For example, if 
innovation is one of your values, 
allow people to take risks and make 
mistakes without being penalized. 
You should also communicate 
your values to your customers, 
clients, and suppliers, so they 
understand your business better, 
which will help foster more 
positive relationships. 


Make sure everyone 
understands 


Discuss what each of your 
chosen values means in 
practice. How will they 

benefit customers or clients? 
How will they help the 
business succeed? How 

realistic are they to achieve? 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Establishing a Culture 


In order to instill your culture into the whole of your business, take 


a holistic approach. 


> Begin by incorporating the values 
into all sections of the business. 


> Communicate the values to all 


those you work with. 


> Actively demonstrate what 
you mean by the values in your 
dealings with staff, customers, 
clients, and suppliers. 


> Adopt values based on what is 
achievable now, not in the future. 


Pick the 
winning ideas 
Place the values in level of 
importance. Choose the top 
seven values that reflect the 
personality and aims of 
the business. Discuss how to 
put these values into action. 


>» Avoid meaningless clichés, such 
as “There is no ‘I’ in team.” 

> Use active language, such as 
“Do the right thing” (Alphabet, 
Google's parent company). 


> Use your values to help guide 
recruitment and decision-making. 


Incorporate the values 


Integrate the values into 
every aspect of your 
business, changing practices 
where necessary. 

You could add them to your 
marketing materials, 
if appropriate. 


162/163 


CPPCC CEOS OSTEO EE HEH HO TEEEH STOTT ESSEC OTE EEHES ESS TESEE ETE ESOEEEESESSEO HE EESESO ESTO EEO SEEEEES 


Managing the 
Business 


Running your own business is rewarding, but as it grows, it can 
be hard for one person to deal with every aspect. You may need 
to bring in people to manage different areas of the operation. 


Identifying skills 

At the beginning, you are likely 
to take on most roles in your 
business to keep costs down. 
Even after you take on your first 
employee, you will probably still 
oversee all areas of management, 
such as production and finance. 
However, as your business 
expands, you will reach a point 
where holding all the management 
responsibility means that you are 
restricting opportunities to 
develop and grow. 

To avoid this situation, plan 
ahead and identify where your 
skills are of best value to the 
business and also note where they 
are less effective. This exercise 
allows you to start to consider 


When recruiting managers into your 


recruiting new managers (see 
pp.126-127) or developing your 
existing staff in order to share 
management responsibility. 

For example, if you excel at sales 
but find IT a challenge, recruiting 
an IT manager will allow you to 
concentrate on what you do best. 


Sharing responsibilities 
Your start-up probably cannot 
afford to employ a whole team of 
managers, but you may be able to 
recruit one or two to oversee linked 
tasks, such as customer service and 
sales, or operations and production. 
As your business grows, so can 
your management team, allowing 
each member to specialize in a 
given area of responsibility. 


Dividing 
& functions 


business, it is important to create a formal 
management structure, with clear lines of 
authority and responsibility. In doing so, the 
manager has a clear understanding of their 
role and place in the business. It also allows 
any staff they manage to understand the 
chain of command. In large, established 
businesses, the management structure 
typically includes multiple levels. However, 
in small ones, it is likely to have just two or 
three levels, with you at the top. 


r—t— 


While you may manage everything 
at first, developing an effective 
management team is always 
something you should plan for in 
order for the business to succeed. 
Divide your business into functional 
areas, with a manager overseeing 
each area, or spanning related areas, 
and with you in overall control. 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 5 / 6 ))) 
Managing the Business 1 4 1 bh 


Sales/marketing ff “= 
Promotes and sell a (3) aKING IT woRK 


existing products and : S| 
Services and plans ak Fi Mance Over time, management structures 
New ones. . "esponcip ... can be changed to suit the needs 
Money in nalty for of the business. A function-based 


structure (see left) is widely used, 
but here are others to consider: 


> Team structure suits businesses 
that need rapid responses to 
problems, although it can be 
hard to maintain overall control. 


> Network structure is “flat” 
(nonhierarchical), decentralized, 
and flexible. Its agility suits 
creative and technology 
companies; its low overheads 
are appealing to start-ups. 


Geooececsescecessecaesesceasessenasee 


“Never doubt 

that a small group 
of committed 
people can change 
the world.” 


Margaret Mead, US cultural anthropologist 


Managing 
a Team 


As your new business grows, your focus may change from working 
directly on tasks yourself, to team management. Setting clear, SMART 
goals and establishing shared core values will help your team thrive. 


Investing in your team shared core values (see pp.162—163), it can 
Employing staff can be a major expense for your new make your business a satisfying place to work. 
business, so it is vital that you make the most of your Set a good example by arriving early and being 


team. Employees are likely to be more motivated ifthey positive and polite, even under pressure. 
are well managed, have clear goals, and are rewarded Consistency is a quality employees value. 


for successes. Even a small business needs a sense People work best when they know what is going 
of shared values and culture. When you and your on, so set clear objectives for your team and ensure 
colleagues establish a positive work culture and information is shared freely around the business. 
SMART management 

The SMART approach enables you S—Specific M-—Measurable 

to set and achieve clear objectivesfor Set precise goals using specific Ensure that you can quantify your 
your team. Each objective is measured _ figures or quantities. Make sure to objective. Establish a measurement 
against five criteria: it must be specific, establish an exact target—an increase © system to record progress made 
measurable, achievable, realistic,and of 50 percent in productivity, for toward your goal. This enables 
time-based. This ensures that you example—so your team knows you to assess the success of the 
and your colleagues approach tasks precisely what they need to achieve. task once it is completed. 


in a consistent way. 


SALES 


E 
2 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 166 / 1 67/ y)) 
Managing a Team 


Make sure to share problems and possible 
solutions, and ensure that mistakes are 


treated as learning opportunities. Holding While the business is evolving, it is important to 
regular staff meetings and posting business keep staff costs to a minimum. You need your team 
updates on message boards are good ways to to be flexible, as well as productive. This may mean 
encourage open, honest communication. performing tasks outside normal roles or working 


unsociable hours. Employees are often willing to 
adapt to new demands if they feel they are being 


treated fairly. Remember to: 


Tral n people > Talk to staff before changing their roles or hours. 
‘ treat > Show flexibility in return, such as accommodating 
employees’ need to start early and finish early. 
th em > Listen to employees who may know more 


detail about the tasks involved than you. 


Sir Richard Branson, British business magnate 


A-Achievable R—-Realistic T-Time-based 

Set goals that you can achieve. Assess Determine realistic goals. Consider Establish a time frame. In order to 
whether you have enough staff and whether your objective is possible in achieve your goal, your team may 
whether they have sufficient capacity _ practical terms. For example, do you need training or you could need more 
to meet your goal. If your current have adequate equipment? If not, you. —_ storage space or better equipment. 
systems cannot accommodate this, will have to source more equipment Take these factors into account and 
you may need to hire additional staff. | before you assign the task. set realistic deadlines. 


R ‘T 
b an 


ce SS Pen A 
ae 2 = & 


THURSDAY 


2 Retaining Talent 


You have to invest time and money to hold onto the best employees. Build good 
relationships with your staff and help them develop their skills so that you do not 
lose them to competitors. Aim to create a workplace in which everyone can thrive. 


Valuing your employees 

New recruits bring fresh ideas and skills to a business, 
but over time, good employees also develop a deeper 
knowledge of how things work. They get to know 
customers and suppliers. They understand the systems 
used by the business. They build relationships with 
other team members. Losing them can upset customers 
and colleagues. Even worse, if your competitors recruit 
them, it can give those businesses an advantage. 


Get to know and value your employees as individuals. 

Understand what motivates them and how they like to 
work. This will help you pick up on any issues that are 
bothering them well before they consider moving on. 


Persuading staff to stay 

Hearing that a key employee wants to leave is never 
good news, and it can even feel like a betrayal. The 
first step is to have an open and honest conversation to 


How to retain talent 


There are three main strategies for retaining your best 
people. The first is to create an environment in which 
employees enjoy working and can thrive. They need to 
feel fulfilled and valued and have enough autonomy 

to use their skills and experience. This is particularly 
important for small businesses where it is not always 
possible to pay high salaries. The second is to provide 
staff members with opportunities to develop through 
training, mentoring, and new challenges. The third is 

to understand what value each person is adding to the 
business and reward them fairly. Try to avoid finding out 
what someone's contribution was only after they have left. 


successful businesses 

treat 
customers like guests 
employees like people 


Tom Peters, US business management guru 


a 
— 


& A good place to work 


> Treat your employees with respect and fairness 
> Keep your employees informed 
> Allow your employees to express their views 


> Offer flexible working arrangements 
> Give staff the resources they need to work well 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Retaining Talent 


168/169 


find out what led them to hand in their notice. Perhaps 
they feel undervalued because they are not getting the 


recognition or reward they deserve, or they are seeking 


promotion and new challenges. Ask whether there 
is anything you can do to keep them. You may be 
able to make a counteroffer and persuade them to 
stay. However, think about the effect your offer may 
have on other people in the business. You will also 
need to recognize their contributions. 

If your employee is determined to leave, accept their 
decision with good grace. Be sure there is enough time 
for a handover to a new person. If this is not possible, 
ask them to type up the important aspects of their job, 
including key contacts and advice for the newcomer. 


i CASE STUDY 


Multi-Ply Components 


Multi-Ply manufactures carbon fiber components for 
X-ray equipment around the world. To retain its best 
employees, it is flexible and comes up with creative 
solutions to retain the people it wants. When a valued 
employee was offered a higher paid job with a major 
employer locally, they discussed why he wanted to 
accept the offer. Although Multi-Ply could not match 
the higher pay, it could offer him a better work-life 
balance and a better job title. 


f 


2) Ways to develop 


> Involve your employees in new projects 
> Appoint internal mentors for more junior staff 
> Encourage your employees to access training 


> Make sure you undertake training yourself 


accion 


© Appropriate rewards 


> Thank employees personally for good 
performance 


> Allow time off at the end of a stressful project 
> Celebrate successes with the whole team 

> Pay a fair salary 

> Offer a profit share 


Ry 


ae a 


Running a 
Sales Team 


Generating sales and dealing with customers are vital to most businesses 
and require expertise. If you do not have the skills to do this yourself, 
recruiting and motivating dedicated sales staff is the best route to success. 


Finding the right salespeople relationships will help a business reliant on 
Whether you plan to hire a dedicated sales executive a small number of repeat customers. While 

or team or to adopt selling responsibilities yourself, it someone persuasive who can identify large 

is important to pinpoint the skills or qualities needed numbers of potential customers will suit sales 

to best sell your product or service. For example, a of one-off products or occasional services. If 
salesperson adept at building trust and long-term competition is fierce, an experienced salesperson 


= 


Steering the team 


Sales staff should be encouraged and 
motivated to work to the best of their 
abilities—and pull together as a team. Set 
high, but achievable, sales goals that provide 
staff with the incentive to push themselves 
but in the knowledge that they have your 
full support. Be transparent about how the 
business is performing and all areas of its 
operation. Promote two-way feedback so 
that staff are clear on sales progress and you 
know their concerns and benefit from new 
ideas. Invest in sales training so staff develop 
new skills and feel valued. 


1 /0F 71 ae 


can provide compelling advice that steers a customer 
toward making a purchase. Make sure to incorporate BE AWARE 
the desired qualities into your job description (see 


> When setting goals for sales staff, do not lose sight 
pp.124—125) when recruiting for a sales role. be: 2 8 


of other business objectives, such as customer 

. . satisfaction and profit margins. 
Representing the business > Ensure targets are set against goals that will stretch 
Salespeople may be the only contact customers have staff. Easy targets can breed complacency. 


with your business. They represent the face of the > Encourage drive and determination in staff, but watch 


organization, so you need sales staff you can trust out for rivalries that can unbalance a team. Use different 
to handle customers well, who believe in your approaches toward different personalities. 

business vision, and operate in a way that reflects its > Leave selling to sales staff. You should not be in 

values. It takes time and hard work to build a positive competition with them but rather be their guide. 

brand reputation and customer loyalty, all of which 

can be lost easily through bad sales experiences. PROS SNS SRG SNES Neues SMUaSORNTNNS MEKKSSDERSC ONAN CES SESS 


never 


without 
selling. If ! believe 
= — 


LV 
» 


sell it, and | sell 
it hard.” 


Estée Lauder, US businesswoman, 1985 


Establishing a 
Healthy Workplace 


If you employ people, you will need to consider their well-being 
in the workplace. By supporting your employees’ physical and 
emotional health, you can help them reach their full potential. 


Encouraging well-being 


Well-being is a combination of feeling both physically 
and emotionally well. People with a sense of well- 
being tend to be more energized, motivated, and 
positive, as well as more resilient under pressure. 
Employees with these qualities are likely to have 
a significant, beneficial impact on your business. 
Looking after your employees will enable them to 
perform at their highest level, and you can develop 


Looking after 
employees’ 
well-being 


Studies into well-being at work 
show that employees need a sense 
of purpose. They want to feel that 
they are contributing to the success 
of the business, that their efforts 
are valued, and that they have 
some control over what they are 
doing—guidelines and instructions 
are useful, but it is more important 
for staff to feel that they have the 
autonomy to decide exactly how 
to do their work. 

Employees must also be able 
to cope with the demands of the 
job. Providing appropriate training 
will help, but watch for signs 
of anxiety, and make sure that 
people know that it is all right 
to say if they have a problem. 


a reputation as a business that cares for its staff, so 


Fairness 
People who feel they are 


being treated fairly at work are 
more likely to be well motivated 
and positive. When you make a 


decision that affects someone, be transparent 
and open, and make sure they understand why 
you made your decision. Ensure pay and 
conditions are fair for all employees. 


Appreciation 


Thank people for their effort; 

even when something has not 
gone completely to plan, it will still 
help raise morale. Appreciation can 


be a financial reward or bonus, but simply 

expressing your thanks in public for a job well done 

is effective, too. Most importantly, your thanks 
must be genuine. 


f 


prospective employees will be excited to join and 
contribute to the success of your enterprise. Poor 
well-being, with staff who are unable to work 
effectively or are absent altogether, has the opposite 
effect and can prove costly. According to a 2019 paper 
from the World Health Organization (WHO), depression 
and anxiety in companies of all sizes costs the global 
economy $1 trillion per year in lost productivity. 


¢ 
a 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Establishing a Healthy Workplace 177 / 1 7 3 ))) 


Creating the right conditions 

Strive to create a working environment in which 
your employees feel contented and fulfilled. You 
will need to make the workplace physically safe 
(see p.98—99), and provide sufficient lighting and 
heating for the cooler months. 

Develop a culture in which employees flourish and 
look forward to coming to work (see pp.162—163). This 
does not mean there should be no rules or discipline; 
people understand these must exist, as long as they 
can see the purpose of them. Aim to create an 
environment where each person feels genuinely 
satisfied with their work and the way in which 
they are managed. 


a =) 
Expectations 


Most people find it stressful 
if things are unclear or if they 


are unsure of what is expected of 
them. Set out clear aims, carefully 


selected goals to motivate people, and give 


them a sense of how they are contributing to the 
success of the business. Set up regular briefings 


to keep them informed of their progress. 


Listen 


Get to know your 
employees individually. Talk 


Although the specific details may differ around 

the world, employers in most countries have legal 
responsibilities for the health and well-being of their 
employees (see pp.212-215). These typically include: 


> Undertaking an 
assessment of any 
potential risks to people 
working in the company. 


> Preparing a health 
and safety policy 
stating what will be 
done to make the 
workplace safe. 


> Having a suitably 
equipped first-aid kit 
and ensuring everyone 
knows where it is. 


> Assessing employees’ 
risk of workplace stress 
and taking action to 
prevent them from 
becoming overly anxious. 


Stress leading to anxiety is a major 
problem in the workplace, so be 
alert for these signs. Be prepared to 
talk to individuals if you think they 
may have a problem. 


> Increased absences People have 
time off work for various reasons, 
but taking more time off than 
normal or arriving late may be 
a sign of anxiety. 

>» Withdrawing Those who are 
anxious may isolate themselves, 
avoid engaging with others, and 
prefer to be quiet and alone. 


>» Becoming overemotional 


to them and listen to what they 
| say. In this way, you not only show 
that you value their unique contributions to 
your business, but you will also be able to sense 
more quickly when something is wrong. Make 
sure that no one is afraid to talk to you. 


If an individual is moody, 
argumentative, or reacting in 
a way that is out of character, 
it is worth investigating. 


>» Working long hours A heavy 
workload might pressurize people 
to work longer hours than usual 
or fail to take adequate breaks 
during the day. 


Managing and 
Resolving Conflict 


Conflict can happen in any business and at any level. While debate 
can lead to a positive outcome, constant arguing will undermine 
your business unless you learn how to manage and resolve it. 


Understanding conflict when to simply observe and Preventing conflict 
Most disputes that occur within monitor. Take action only when The best way to prevent unhealthy 
your team will be short-lived and you have to, and encourage conflict is to create a working 
minor, and it is impossible to individuals to take responsibility environment in which everyone 
prevent them all. Instead, aim to for finding a solution. When serious _ feels able to say what they think 
limit the damaging aspects of any conflicts arise, speak to those and express their feelings. This will 
friction between colleagues. Make involved but look beyond what help stop problems from escalating. 
sure to resolve any conflicts that people tell you (see box, right) for If, for example, someone is feeling 
occur between yourself and team the real reasons behind the issue. under pressure to meet a deadline 
members, tailoring your approach It is important to be calm, rational, but they do not feel able to ask for 
to the situation. Take advantage of and unbiased. Do not be drawn support, they may become stressed. 
new ideas or outcomes that result. into the argument, but try to put This can then result in a loss of 
Resolving conflict between people at ease. Listen carefully to confidence, leading perhaps to a 
people can be time-consuming. what they are saying and look for period of absence from work and 
Learn when to intervene and evidence to back it up. feelings of tension 


Handling conflict 


In 1974, American professors of management Ken Thomas Avoiding 
and Ralph Kilmann published a model for resolving conflict. 
Widely used today, it sets out five possible approaches. 
Most people have a natural preference for one of the 
approaches, but understanding and being able to 

utilize all five modes will help you handle conflicts 

with or among your colleagues more effectively. 


With trivial issues, for example, avoiding can 
be the best approach. However, for issues f 


that must be resolved decisively, 


This approach involves 
withdrawing from a situation or 
postponing dealing with the 
conflict until a better time. It 
works for minor issues, such as 
trivial disagreements, when you 
cannot invest time or effort. 


competing may be the better option. 


fs 


- 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 


Managing and Resolving Conflict 174 / 1 A b ))) 


or conflict. It is essential that your 
colleagues understand their goals 
and know how to achieve them, 
because a lack of clarity may 
lead to misunderstandings and 
disagreements in your workplace. 
Create space for both formal and 
informal communication. Get to 
know and understand your team 
members. This makes it easier to 
pick up on any causes of tension. 


To resolve conflict, you need to understa 


nd its root causes. Do not simply 


take things at face value—look for the underlying reasons. These causes 


commonly fall into the following groups: 


> Differing personalities and 
working styles can clash, when 
people prefer to behave and work 
in a particular way. 

> Stress caused by pressure, such 
as demanding deadlines or a lack of 
training, can cause tempers to fray. 


Mal 


Collaborating 


This approach means 

searching for a position that 

fully satisfies both sides. It involves 
digging deeper into the sources of 
conflict. Use it when an issue is importa’ 
and merits the time and effort invested. 


> Lack of clarity can lead to 
misunderstandings between people 
with opposing views and opinions. 


> Sense of being undervalued or 
“not heard” at work can make 
people become dissatisfied 
and argumentative. 


“Peace is not the absence 
of conflict, but the ability 


to cope with it.” 


hatma Gandhi, Indian politician and activist 


~ 


nt 


Managing Staff 
Performance 


Whether you have one part-time worker or a hundred full-timers, your staff 
will have a huge impact on your business. When employees perform well and 
realize their potential, they make a big difference to the success of the business. 


Setting expectations employee is underperforming, you they do not understand something 
As a business leader, one of your will need to act before the issue or if they encounter a problem. It is 
most essential tasks is to assemble becomes more serious. better to know that something is 
and maintain a high-performing It is good practice to set out your awry early on than to discover it 


staff. The keys to this are threefold: expectations of performance levels 
recruiting the right people, making _on the first day that someone starts 
sure that everyone knows what you work. Take time to talk to the new 


later simply because someone has 
been too hesitant to approach you. 


expect of them, and regularly recruit, get to know them, and let learn from them and make sure 


monitoring performance. If an them know they can 


speak to youif they do not happen again. 


h 


Hold a formal, structured discussion about personal 
performance with each member of staff at least once 
a year. Meet with them in private to talk about how 
their work is going. Use the meeting to agree on 
goals, monitor progress, and discuss concerns. 


> Give the employee plenty of advance warning of 
the meeting's time, location, and duration. 

> Make it a conversation rather than an interrogation. 

> Use the time to discuss the employee's ambitions 
and training needs, as well as their immediate work. 

> Allow time for them to give feedback to you about 
what is working for them and what is not. 

> Do not shy away from discussing any performance 
problems you have picked up. 

>» Make notes to summarize the meeting—including 
any actions that have been agreed on—and send 
them to the employee. 


Mistakes happen. It is important to 


inl 


is influence, | 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Managing Staff Performance 


) successtul eepiarebtiae 


Ken siuehaah US management and leadership author 


Motivating staff 

Defining achievable goals for 

each employee is the best way of 
getting across your expectations 
and motivating your staff. But take 
care to ensure that targets for 
individual staff members do not 
undermine collective working. 
Setting the wrong targets can 
result in employees competing with 
each other rather than cooperating 
and sharing information. 


If you get to know your staff as 
individuals, it will make it easier for 
you to spot if something is wrong. 
Adopt a “walk-and-talk” strategy, 
regularly mixing with employees to 
find out how they are and whether 
they are coping. Let them know 
what is happening in the business, 
and remind them of their value in 
the workplace. Remember that if 
staff feel appreciated, they are 
more likely to perform well. 


176/177 


0 BE AWARE 


There is considerable legislation 
around discipline and dismissal. 
Make sure that your business has a 
policy that reflects this and that all 
staff are aware of it. If in doubt, 
engage the services of a legal 
professional. Be sure to: 


> Gather relevant evidence. 


) Give the employee an 
opportunity to improve. 


> Be fair and impartial. 


Failing to follow the law is likely to 
result in a claim for unfair dismissal 
(see pp.212-215). 


If a member of staff is not performing as well as they 
should, act quickly to prevent the problem from 
escalating and affecting your business. Speak to 
the person informally to establish what can be done. 
If this does not work, then you will need a more 


formal meeting. 


> Gather evidence of any poor performance in 
advance. Let the person know why you are meeting. 

> Be firm but fair, making sure you focus on the 
problem and not on the personality of the individual. 

> Be calm and supportive; it is likely to be a difficult 
and possibly stressful experience for the employee. 

> Explain the situation as you see it, then invite the 
employee to respond. 

>» Work together to agree on a performance 
improvement plan; this is better than imposing one. 

> Put your agreement in writing and set a date for 
a follow-up meeting. 


Streamlining 
Business Processes 


A process is a series of activities that are linked together to deliver a particular 
product or service. Mapping your processes will enable you to visualize how 
efficiently your business is organized and reveal any areas for improvement. 


Creating a visual representation 

Mapping out the key processes that your business uses 
will help ensure that your operations run as efficiently 
as possible—reducing costs and waste. It will also 
highlight which activities within your key processes 
that are worth investing in, or even eliminating. 

The concept of process mapping originated in 
manufacturing, where raw materials are transformed 
from their natural state through a series of steps into 
the finished product. However, you can use process 
maps for any type of operation—from a restaurant 
business receiving a booking, greeting the diner, 
taking their order, and serving the food, toa 
gardening business, which involves buying seeds, 


growing plants, and selling them to customers. 

In each case, the aim is to identify each step and 
its relationship with others. Creating a map is not 
complicated and simply involves recognizing each 
step of the processes within your business and 
sketching it out in sequence to create a visual 
representation of all the activities involved. 


Understanding value 

Once you have created a map, you can examine each 
step of your process and find ways to streamline it. 
This will help eliminate wasted time and effort and 
reduce costs. However, you can also use the map to 
assess the value of each step. 


Using a process map 


Nonessential/ 
A business-process map can provide value adding LY 
revealing and valuable information. Activity 2 
Consider each step or activity your Activities like these benefit your 
business uses to complete each key business but could be eliminated if 
process. For example, if your business they cease to add significant value. 
delivers a service, map out every 
activity you undertake from start 
to finish. You can now assess each 
activity to decide whether it is 
essential or not. Similarly, you can also Activity 1 


identify whether it adds value to your 
business or not. While essential tasks 
must be retained, nonessential ones 
that add value are also worth keeping. 
Review your processes regularly, as 
new technology may enable you 

to simplify them. 


Essential/value adding 


Activities like these are valuable 
to your business and customers. 
Consider investing in them. 


Business processes are often described as “value 
adding” or “non-value adding.” The former are part 
of the operation that adds value directly to customers 
or clients, such as physically making a product or 
performing a service, such as delivering food to a 
customer. Non-value-adding processes are support 
services, such as IT or accounting, which are essential 
for the running of a company but are invisible to 
customers and do not add direct value to them. 

As your business grows, try to ensure that your 
value-adding and non-value-adding processes are 
in balance. Since all processes incur some cost, such 
as material or staff costs, spending more on value- 
adding processes should result in a better return on 
investment. Beware of neglecting your non-value- 
adding processes, however, since failing to produce 
your accounts or monitor cash flow, for example, could 
cause a serious problem for your business. Both types 


of processes can easily be mapped by thinking through 


each step that must be taken (or if your business is 
already running, by observing) and putting it into 
your business-process map. 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 1'/ Q / 1 79 ))) 
Streamlining Business Processes 


A process map of your whole business will give you a 

full overview of the operation, and can also be used to 
inform others - both within, and outside, the business. 
By mapping out each step clearly, and how it relates to 


the others in the sequence, you can use it to ensure that 
everyone involved with the business knows exactly how 
it functions. This can be useful when talking to potential 
investors or when inducting new recruits, allowing them 
to see and understand how the business works. 


is nothing 
so useless as doin: 


should not be done at all.” 


Peter Drucker, US management consultant 


Essential/non-value adding 


Activity 3 
Activities like these are important to retain 
but are not worth investing in unless they 
start to add value. 
Activity 4 Activity 5 
Nonessential/ 
non-value adding 


Activities like these should be removed 
as soon as possible, saving you time 
and money. 


Managing Your 
Supply Chain 


A supply chain is the network of people, processes, and activities required 
to deliver the products or services you sell. Creating an efficient supply chain 
will save you time and money and increase profitability. 


Understanding supply chains packaging from various suppliers, make the products, 
A supply chain is like a series of steps that you have package them, then either sell them directly or deliver 
to take in order to deliver a product or service to your them to the customer. If any link in your supply chain 
customer or client. Every business has a supply chain, fails, you will lose time, potentially incur extra costs, 
although some are longer and more complex than and disappoint your customer or client. Similarly, if 
others. For example, an ice-cream shop may only your supply chain is poorly organized or includes 
require ice-cream, spoons, and cartons to do business. unnecessary steps, you will waste time and 

In contrast, a baker will need to source ingredients and money (see pp.178-179). 


Managing a supply chain 


The strength and efficiency of your supply chain plays 
a key role in how reliably your business can deliver its 
products and services. To save time and money, aim 
to create a chain that is robust and efficient. 


It should also be flexible enough so that if a single link 
breaks, it can be quickly repaired and not disrupt the other 
links in the chain. Start by reviewing your chain and look 
for ways to strengthen each link. 


Understand your 
supply chain 
Know what each link in the 
chain is and how it connects 


to the next. Research all of 


your suppliers and ensure 
they meet your ethical 
standards, and can abide 
by your code of conduct 
(see pp.102-103). 


Identify potential 
weaknesses 
Examine each link and look 
for possible weaknesses. 
Consider what the impact of 
those weaknesses would be 
for your business. 


Create contingency 
plans 
Plan ways of avoiding 
problems should they occur. 
Create contingency plans 
and make sure you can put 
them in place quickly if 
the need arises. 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 180 / 1 8 i| ))) 
Managing Your Supply Chain 


Managing your supply chain 


To ensure your supply chain is strong and effective, 
you need to understand how it works, and where 
potential weaknesses are before you can find ways 

to improve it. For example, if your business makes 

and sells necklaces, you may have a bead supplier in 
China, and a designer and jeweler in France who make 
the necklaces before sending them to you to sell in your 
shop. What would happen if your bead supplier failed 
to send the beads in time and your jeweler could not 
meet your agreed delivery date? Once you understand 
what could go wrong, you can put plans in place to 
mitigate any risks. You can also look for new ways of 
doing things; perhaps you could buy in ready-made 
necklaces as well as creating them from scratch, so 


that you would always have stock available. 


Streamline your 
supply chain 
Look for ways to streamline 
your supply chain for 


maximum efficiency. 
Perhaps you can use 
technology to cut down 
on the time it takes 
to do things. 


Seek professional 
advice and insight 
Talk to your suppliers to 
gain insights into how you 
could do things better. 
Ask them about their 
experiences with 
other clients. 


719% 


of companies with 
high-performing 
supply chains 

achieve above-average 
revenue growth 


www2.deloitte.com, 2020 


Review your supply 
chain regularly 
Things change so keep 
reviewing your supply chain 
to check that it still works in 
the same way, and that it still 
runs smoothly. 


Improving 


the Business 


Even if your business is currently performing well, you can never assume that it 
will continue to do so. To remain competitive, it is important to regularly improve 
your processes to ensure you are offering what your customers expect. 


Reviewing your business 
Many small business owners spend much of their 
time dealing with unexpected problems, such as 
customer complaints, quality issues, and late deliveries. 
As aresult, they have less time to spend on planning 
and growing their businesses. The best way to avoid 
this is by streamlining your processes (see pp.178-179), 
and improving performance (see below). 

Improving business performance involves looking 
at your operations and processes, and identifying 
ways in which they could function better. You can 
do this slowly and incrementally over a period of 
time, by analysing each stage and activity in your 
business to determine how it could be done more 
effectively and efficiently. 


Another way to make improvements is through 
“step change”. This means rethinking your business, 
and making bold and rapid changes. For example, you 
may scrap entire products or services from your range, 
or decide to outsource activities currently performed 
inhouse. (see pp.50—51). However, the safest way is 

to improve and change your business slowly and 
methodically over time. 

Improving your business should be continuous, 

not a one-off exercise. Invite your staff to be part 

of the process, so that they are prepared for change 
(see pp.204—205). You should create a culture in 
which everyone observes what is happening 

and feels able to make suggestions for how 

things could work better. 


Improving 
performance 


It is essential to review your business 
processes regularly, to ensure that 


1. Quality 


everything is working well. One way 
of improving performance is by 
using the “Sand Cone” model. 
Although this approach was devised 
for manufacturing, it can be applied 
to services, too. The model divides 
the capabilities of a business into a 
hierarchy of priorities: quality, speed, 
flexibility, and cost. For optimal 
performance, the model suggests 
that you begin with quality; move 

on to speed; then improve flexibility; 
and finally look at cost. If you use this 
method, remember to be patient— 
you need to believe that your costs 
will decrease in time. 


Quality comes first. Unless you deliver quality 
products and services first time, every time, you 
risk upsetting customers and clients, and wasting 
money. Getting it right first time means there is no 
rework and there is consistency in delivery time, so 
your processes are reliable. 


2. Speed 


Reliable processes are costly, so you need to look 
at how to run them faster. Doing things quickly 
reduces costs, but quality can suffer, so work on 
delivering quality quickly. Can you speed up 
delivery, for example, by using new technology? 


re 


J“ 


a a 
Sees 


An Zn ras a 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 18? / 1 Q 3 yy) 
Improving the Business 


CPPCC OOOH HEE EE HEH HOE ESTHET OTE ESS EET EEEHES ESS EESEE ET EESOSEEESESSEO PE EESHSO ESTEE EOSEEEEES 


spend 


68% As your workforce grows, you 
might want to consider creating 


i ry 7 an operations manual, which is a 
fi refighti ng document that explains exactly 
re) how your business functions. 
32 Yo long- Although they vary from business 


to business, they typically detail 


te rm planning the steps used to complete your 


The Alternative Board, 2016 business processes; staff roles and 
Cost responsibilities; best practices; and 


emergency procedures. Having a 
record of every business function 
is more than just a tool to train 
new employees—it serves to record 
valuable knowledge in the event of 
staff leaving the business. 


An operations manual also makes 
your business far more attractive to 
prospective buyers. If you plan to 
sell or franchise your business, it is 
evidence that the business can run 
without you being present. 


Flexibility 


3. Flexibility 


The wider the range of products/services delivered 
by the same process, the harder it is to deliver 
quality quickly. Focus on your core products/ 


Speed services, but stay flexible by creating alternative 
processes for special or unexpected orders. 


4. Cost 


Only once you can ensure the quality, speed, 

and flexibility of your processes, should you 

seek to improve costs. It would be a waste of time 
trying to address costs while other areas of your 


e 
Qual ity business still require improvement. 


Preparing fora 
Business Crisis 


You cannot predict exactly which crises will arise in the future. 
But when you prepare careful plans and processes, your business 
will be better equipped to handle unexpected events if they occur. 


Planning ahead 

Major incidents such as fire, flood, 
and IT failure happen rarely but can 
have a devastating impact on any 
small business. Create a plan for 
how to deal with such crises to 
save you time, reduce stress, and 
enable you to cope more easily. You 
can predict some of the impacts of a 
crisis, for example, being unable to 
communicate with your customers, 
and dealing with a lack of stock or 
damage to your premises. If you 
prepare in advance for these 
scenarios, it will make your 


business more resilient. You 

may also find that planning for 

one eventuality may prove useful 
in another unexpected crisis. 
Different kinds of crises can create 
similar constraints. For example, 
you might want to create a plan for 
people to work remotely and deliver 
customer services online in the 
event of a major flu epidemic. In 
the event of a natural disaster, 
such as flooding or an earthquake, 
which could limit people’s ability to 
travel, your plan for an epidemic 
could still be put to good use. 


Consider possible scenarios 


Crises can be external, such as flood and fire, 
or internal, such as manufacturing a faulty 
product or causing food poisoning through 

insufficient hygiene practices. Consider 
what would happen if any of these 


events occurred. 


Making your plan 


Assemble crisis control plans with 
input from your colleagues and 
suppliers. Allocate responsibility 
for specific actions such as 
customer contact, or dealing 
with emergency services. 

Write down the plan and 

ensure everyone is aware of 

it and understands their role. 

If possible, test your plan with a 
mock crisis and review it regularly 
as situations change. Use the 
processes below to identify 

what should be in your plan. 


Assess the likelihood 


Some businesses will naturally be more prone 
to specific problems. Food poisoning is more 
likely in a restaurant, for example, and 
businesses sited near rivers are more likely to 
flood. Focus on planning for situations most 
likely to occur in your business. 


RUNNING YOUR BUSINESS 
Preparing for a Business Crisis 184 / dl 8 bh yo 


» Keep a cool head when you need to act quickly, and 
take a moment to think about what you are doing. 


> Establish your priorities to ensure that your actions 
are likely to have the best impact on the situation. 


» Communicate clearly with precise instructions 
so that everyone understands exactly what is 
expected of them. 


>» Manage people under pressure by listening to 
their concerns but remaining calm and reassuring 
to prevent any panic. 

> Stay positive and be alert to the unexpected; 
sometimes a crisis can open new opportunities. 


small businesses 


COVID-19 crisis 
low financial resilience. 


US small-business recovery after the COVID-19 crisis, 
McKinsey & Company, 2020 


Identify possible solutions Analyze the implications 
When figuring out solutions, think about ways Consider the consequences of your proposed 
of limiting the damage and how you could actions. Additional cost is the most likely 
prevent it from happening in the first place. implication, but your plans could also affect 
For example, ensuring your data is backed your staff morale or your business reputation 
up with adequate security if you do not adequately take into account 


is always a good idea. the needs of clients, colleagues, or suppliers. 


Harnessing 
Technology 


Making effective use of technology will speed up 
communication, improve engagement with your 
customers, and enable you to work more efficiently. 


Investing in technology 
Even the smallest, one-person 
business faces a mind-boggling 
array of software, applications 
(apps), and other digital tools, 
all offering constantly changing 
features and benefits. Most will 
add purchasing and training costs 
to your business, so deciding how 
and when to invest in technology 
requires careful consideration. 
Every business has specific 
technology needs, increasingly 
driven by the expectation of clients 
or customers, such as the ability 
to book services and pay for goods 
online. It is easy to overspend on 


DATA SECURITY 


As your business grows, it will 
hold increasing volumes of data, 
such as customer cell phone 
numbers and email addresses and 
lists of suppliers or investors. It is 
essential to keep this data safe to 
protect your business and to 
ensure compliance with relevant 
local data regulations (see p.212). 
Businesses are increasingly 
vulnerable to hackers, malware, 
and other forms of cyber attack, so 
it is vital to ensure the security of 
your systems. Even the smallest 
business should take at least some 
simple steps to protect valuable 
data (see pp.120-121). 


hardware—such as computers 

or printers—and software that is 
not strictly necessary or offers only 
short-term benefits, so it can be 


worth paying for specialized advice. 


A technology expert will consider 
your business activities and digital 
options, then make a plan for your 
immediate requirements, while 
also allowing for future capacity to 
be easily integrated. You cannot 
future-proof technology, but you 
can build some adaptability into 
your tech systems by choosing 
hardware and software that can 
easily be expanded and updated 
over time. 


Working smarter 


As part of an integrated technology 
plan, the right computer systems, data 
and management software, and apps 
can help you and your business work 
more efficiently and improve your 
products and services. 

Whatever tools you decide to 
use, you should make sure they are 
compatible with each other, both 
in terms of technology and in how 
they work together to develop the 
business. Here are some examples 
of how utilizing technology could 
help your business. 


Portable hardware 


Portable devices such as 
laptops and hard drives 
enable colleagues to 
work remotely. Ensure 
colleagues can access 
files from devices out 
of the office. 


Free software 
Commercial software can 
be costly. Consider 
starting with free-to-use 


software and apps, but 
check that they are 
compatible and secure. 


Cloud services 


Online cloud servers are 
a way of using someone 
else's computers to store 
data and run programs. 
Reduce your costs by 
moving business 
functions to the cloud. 


Digital 

communication 
Video-calling apps and 

social media can connect 

people across the world. 
Collaborate more 

effectively with suppliers 

and colleagues. 


Le 


O Ssecsccccssoscscccsesces O—O 


Smartphone apps 
allow product browsing | 
and instant purchases. 
Monitor customer 
habits and identify 
online buying and 
selling trends. 


bad 


Online support 
Helpdesk applications 
and feedback apps put 
customers at the heart of 
technology solutions. 
Respond to customer's 
needs more efficiently 
using online support. 


Digital marketing 
Traditional marketing 

(see pp.64-65) is being 
overtaken by digital. 
Build a social media 

presence and identify 
online opportunities 

(see pp.140-141). 


Data analytics 


Online analytical tools 
capture and study data 
about customer behavior 
and experiences. 
Improve your service 
or product with these 

essential insights. 


Harnessing Technology 1 8 6 1 8 7 


NEED TO KNOW 


> Algorithms are sets of 
mathematical instructions fed 
into a computer, which can then 
process data to produce insights 
into a business and its customers. 
> Near-field communication 
(NFC) enables two closely placed 
devices to exchange data, such as 
achip and pin payment system. 
> Open-source software is a 


usually free-to-use technology, 
although the source code is 


shared and open to modification. 


if you're not 
part of the 
steamroller, 


Stewart Brand, US author, 1987 


GROWING 
YOUR BUSINESS 


SiN El 
\ 
“oN 


Growling Your 
+ Business 


For your business to grow, you will need to sell more of what you 
are currently offering. There are many ways of doing this, from 
finding new customers to coaxing existing customers to spend more. 


Developing a growth strategy 

To give your business the best chance to grow, you 
need to decide on a strategy for retaining buyers, 
winning repeat sales, and expanding your customer 
base. This may include offering enhanced customer 
care, better delivery options, improving existing 
products or services, and offering new ones—all of 


Cultivating success 


Increasing sales is challenging, 

but by applying simple strategies to 
your business, and developing your 
employees’ capabilities, you can 
achieve growth. 


PROMOTING GROWTH 


Nurture existing customers and 
improve service to encourage loyalty. 
Reach out to new customers through 

social media and email, local 
networking, advertising, and 
marketing (see pp.198-199). 


which should fuel growth and keep you ahead of your 
competitors. While lack of growth or slow growth is 
clearly undesirable, it is important to manage the 
growth process. Growing too fast can knock your 
business plan off course. Think ahead and ensure 
that you can increase financing, staffing, production 
capacity, and your supply of materials when needed. 


=< 


sceceecsesevscseosececs 


MAXIMIZING GROWTH 


To maximize growth potential, keep 
in touch with—and be ready to 
exploit—changes in the world at large. 
Shifts in buying habits and new 
payment methods, technological 
developments, and social trends 
could open up fresh markets for your 
business, or expand existing ones. 


LEADING GROWTH 


Since you are in charge, you will have 
to communicate clearly with your staff 


If you feel unsure of yourself, consider 
undertaking training to improve your 
leadership skills or working 
with a coach or mentor. 


and inspire them with your enthusiasm. 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 190 is 1 fe) 1 yy) 
Growing Your Business 


CORPO SOSA ESS EE HTOSASESESHEESTEEHOOE SEE EEHEESTOEEOSEEEEHSOSOEEESESEOES 


0 BE AWARE 


It is vital to keep pace with demand, but not to 

grow your business too quickly. If demand grows 

too rapidly, you may not be able to fulfill orders or meet 
promised delivery times, and this can lead to customer 
and client disappointment. On the other hand, if growth 
is too rapid, you can run into cash-flow problems if 
revenues do not come in quickly enough to cover your 
rising expenses. Likewise, if staffing levels do not increase 
to match the extra workload, the burden on employees 
may result in personnel quitting. Such issues may put 
strain on your leadership and management abilities 

and divert you from your ideal business plan. 


Expanding 
Your Business 


As your business grows, you may be tempted to expand, but you will 
need to recognize when the time is right. Consider different ways to 
expand, and decide which approach makes sense for you. 


When should you expand? 

Expanding a business is different from growing it. 
Growth would be selling more of your product or 
providing more of your service. Expansion is a 

step further. It can include product diversification 

(see pp.194-195), which means adding new products 
or services alongside your original ones. Expansion 
could also involve moving into new lines of business 
and new markets. You may want to expand if your 
growth has slowed and efforts to increase sales have 
not worked. This can happen if your product or service 
becomes outmoded due to old technology or changing 
tastes, or if its value is underappreciated in your 
current marketplace. For example, an ice-cream shop 


could decide to expand its original range of rich 
desserts by introducing fresh fruit sorbets to appeal 
to increasingly health-conscious customers. Ora 
graphic design studio might expand into offering 
full-service website building to attract more clients. 
Keeping up-to-date with consumer news and social 
and technology trends, as well as carefully tracking 
your earnings over time, will help you figure out 
when the time is right to expand. 


Expanding too fast 

The main challenge when expanding your business 
will be managing your time, which will be stretched 
more thinly over both your original core business and 


Ways to expand 


Products or services 


There are various ways to expand your 
enterprise. As a small business owner, 
you may want to focus on offering a 
new product or service, while staying 
within your existing marketplace. 
Alternatively, you may be expanding 
beyond your current location, but 
with the original product or service, 
or perhaps combining both strategies. 
In all cases, you need to research your 
chosen path, cost it, create a schedule, 
and adjust your current business plan 
to ensure the expansion progresses 
smoothly. Here are a few options for 
expanding your business: 


Creating a complementary 
or “add-on” product or 
service to accompany 
what you already offer, 

or heading in a different 
direction with a brand new 
product or service are both 
effective ways to expand. 


wa OS 


Acquisitions 
Acquiring or investing ina 


related business may help 

you create new products or 

establish a new market in =) 
amore cost-effective way. 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 19? / 1 fe) 3 x 
Expanding Your Business 


the new venture. To avoid losing touch with your 


customers, be prepared to recruit people to support “Scal e is i m po rtant fo ra 
your customer service. You will also need to manage st a rt- u p. Th i n k bi g, b u t 


increasing demands on existing staff. If they feel too 

much is being asked of them, they may quit, leaving ' M 1 ” 
you to hire and train new employees. Plan your rate take It on ec day at a tl me. 
of expansion carefully to avoid these problems. Kunal Bahl, cofounder of Snapddeal 


To meet the additional administration and service requirements that come with expansion, 
you need to take steps in advance to prepare and manage the process effectively. 


> Recordkeeping and infrastructure Update your >» Personnel Manage your existing staff, promoting where 
software and systems so that they can manage more appropriate, and hire new members to fill key roles. Treat 
products or markets, when the demand for tracking your personnel with sensitivity, so that you maintain a 


business operations also increases. positive and engaged workforce. 


» Capital Plan ahead to secure the extra financing that » Delegating Be less hands-on. As your business expands, 
expansion often requires for new equipment, staff, or your role will demand more leadership and the delegation 
other needs. You can then show investors or lenders a of day-to-day operations to others in your team. Review 
business plan and projections based on current trading. how your business is managed, (see pp.164-165). 


Partnerships 


Teaming up with a partner 
business could enable you 


to share resources or 
expertise. The business 
may be able to provide 
a specific service that 


your business needs in 
order to expand... 


Global expansion 


Crossing national borders 
(physically or online) can bring 
you rewards, but poses logistical 
challenges. To be successful, you 
may need to employ a mixture 
of strategies. Consider partnering 
with companies in the new 
region or seeking help from 
trade organizations. 


Regional expansion \O5;5 \@ 
Establishing new locations, oi e y < ~ a 


such as a branch office or ; 


store in another part of the 


country, or supplying yr ~< 
your product to outlets / eC ) 
in new regions can all N J 
help you to expand. » Z 


te 


tt) Growth Strategies 


There are a number of strategies you can use to help your business grow, 
depending on what you want to achieve. Once you have decided which 
option supports your objectives, you can start working toward it. 


Planning to grow starting your business (see pp.42—43), to ensure 
Before committing to a growth strategy, first ensure sufficient demand and to identify what competition 
there is sufficient demand to support your plans. If you you will face. Finally, be certain that the financial 

are hoping to target similar customers as you do now, rewards of your intended strategy exceed the costs 
make sure your new plans will continue to meet their of implementing it (see pp.80—81). As part of this, also 
needs and expectations (see pp.40—41). Similarly, try to evaluate the disruption your plans may bring to 
research the market thoroughly, as you did before your existing business—and to your personal life. 


Typical growth strategies 


_ Ve / VU The four strategies shown here are based on 
na a model proposed in 1957 by Igor Ansoff, a 
Russian American mathematician and business 
manager. The Ansoff Matrix is still used to explain 
common growth and expansion tactics. 


a plan te 


smallbusiness.co.uk, 2015 


i CASE STUDY 


Zomato 


Founded in 2008 in Delhi, India, as 
a simple restaurant listing service, 
Zomato operates in 24 countries 
and 10,000 cities. Key to its growth 
is a willingness to diversify: as well 
as listings and reviews, it now offers 
delivery, a membership program, 
and the option to book both a 
table for, and a taxi to, the venue 
via its app. Zomato has reached out 


to eateries, too. It helps owners 
develop their own apps, provides 
advice based on data from users, 


and offers digitized management 
services. Acquisitions and forging 
alliances with other companies 
helped it enter markets overseas. Starting point 
Your market stall sells organic tomatoes that you 
grow on your small farm. Every week you sell out 
FDC OC Sa G TOO UCCOCCOROCOOOCNE AOOTOL of tomatoes and have to turn customers away. 


td 
& 
4 
* 
EBs) 


one eee. koe oS ) 


COOP OOOO T HEE EE HEH EEO TEETH ET OTEESH ESOT EESHESESSEEHEE ES EESHEOESSESEE ORE EESESO ESE SESE SESESES 


Deciding your route 
Once you understand your customers, the market, and 


the costs involved in growing your business, use this Although growth can potentially bring great rewards, it 


information to decide the best of four strategies (see always entails some risk-many companies fail because 
below). Essentially, you can sell more of your offering they try to grow too soon, too quickly, or by too much. 
to your existing market, sell the same offering to a new Ask yourself, do you even need to grow the business? For 


market, sell a new offering to your existing market, or some businesses, staying the same size but improving 
sell a new offering to a new market. how they operate can be more rewarding. Much will 
gat ; se depend on why you started the business and what you 
Each option involves risk, which increases as your : : z 
5 yee : want out of it. If your business is already successful, and 
plan diverges from your existing business model. allows you to maintain a healthy work-life balance, there 
However, your research will help you choose the may be little to gain by growing it further. 


strategy most likely to lead to successful growth. 


Diversification 


Market development 

A few new restaurants open up nearby, 
prompting you to offer daily deliveries 
to them. This represents a new market, 
helping balance out monthly 
revenues, since your stall 

trade slows down in 

cooler weather. 


Your local supermarket does not stock 
organic pasta sauce. You invest in more 
bottling equipment, buy up tomatoes 
from other local organic farms, and 
begin selling your sauce to the 
supermarket chain, which 
has 20 stores. 


Market penetration 

To meet excess customer 
demand, you will have to 
build a new greenhouse 
in order to grow more 
tomatoes. However, the 
increased revenue you 
gain from selling more 
tomatoes will justify the 
expense you incur. 


Product development 
You are selling as many 
market-quality tomatoes 
as you can produce, but 
you have to discard any 
that are misshapen. You 
decide to use these to 
produce organic pasta 
sauce, which you sell from 
your existing market stall. 


Existing 


FF) Growth 


Financing Business 


Once your business has reached the point where it needs more money 
to grow, you will have to make decisions about how much additional 


finance you require and how to raise it. 


Assessing your needs 

If you have decided to take your 
business forward either by growing 
it or expanding it, your next step 
will be to plan a strategy to fund 
this phase. Start by listing the 
resources that your business 
requires in order to grow, and 


budget for each item. Overbudget 
slightly to allow for contingencies 
(unexpected costs that may 
suddenly arise and potentially 
derail your project). Having arrived 
at an overall figure, you should be 
able to calculate how much funding 
you need. Be prepared to justify 


how you will spend it. The next 
step is to find the right type of 
financing for your business. 


Types of financing 

The nature of your business will 
dictate the types of financing you 
might seek. For example, if you 


Preparing your VG 
finances % infor Wdiy 
Wh i factoe ype oe n 
en you approach potential lenders, LLL hetypeo LOE: 6 you 
investors, or grant-funding bodies, sineai yy, 


you need to be clear about what you 
are asking for and why. You must also 
be prepared to provide evidence 

of how far your business has come, 
how strong its finances are, and how 
promising its future is. To do this, 
make sure your finances are in order 
and you have a well-thought-out plan 
for spending any money you borrow. 


— 
Ly 


4 Planning how to 
use the money 
Prioritize expenditure so that you 
do not run out of money before 
the key resources for growing your 
business have been acquired. 


7 of 


By Ye 
ed 


om 90 oy Up UY edi 
= ney Vis Wi 


Y, 


FUE 


oO ee pacton cash 

HEE Wise 

ine equi Ligie Bi Ss 
— ever egy eg 
? syne che iiss 


SU Yy 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 196 / 1 Q'/ )) 
Financing Business Growth 


are in manufacturing, you may 
decide that buying rather than 


renting premises mn enable ven Once your business has a track record, lenders (see pp.82-85) may be more 
to increase production capacity open to you, and offer better interest rates. Venture capitalists will be most 
and add value to your business, interested in your business during its high-growth phase, whereas grant givers 
in which case it may make sense will be impressed if you are pioneering a new product or service. 

for you to apply for a commercial > Lenders If you already have a will invest and take a share of the 
mortgage. Also, think about loan, discuss consolidating this profits but not get involved in 
whether your needs are short debt by taking out a new, larger managing the business). 

term or long term. If short term, loan that may offer more favorable | } Grants Funds are available through 


investigate ways to help you rates of interest. government (see pp.212-215), 
manage cash flow during a > Investors If your business is civic, university, corporate, and 


growth period. If long term, your already showing promise, you will philanthropic bodies, especially for 

b ‘ 1 be in a stronger position to attract businesses making a positive impact 
est options are to get a Oellor crowdfunding investors, venture on society. 

a grant or to find an investor. capitalists, or a business angel (who 


48% 


of small business loans in the 
US are made by large banks 


finimpact.com, 2020 


Analyzing your customers 
It is vital to focus your efforts on 
the customers who are more likely 
to give you repeat business and 
spend more on each purchase 

(see pp.152—153). Regularly 
examine your sales data, use free 
tools such as Google Analytics 
(see pp.212—215), and gather 
information on growth in your 
market to identify any changes in 
your customer base. Although your 
business may have appealed to a 
certain type of customer at first, 
you need to know whether that has 
changed, why those changes may 


An influencer is an individual 

with a large social media following, 
sometimes with millions subscribing 
to their channels. They “influence” 
followers by posting paid-for 
content promoting a brand's 
product or service. 


Partnering with influencers 
can be a valuable tool, enabling 
you to advertise your business to 
a particular target audience—the 
influencer’s followers. For example, 
if you sell fitness equipment, 
you could sponsor an influencer 
known to be an exercise fanatic, 
whose followers would likely be 
interested in fitness and find your 
product appealing. 


Attracting 
New Business 


Gaining new customers or clients can help your start-up 
grow. Conventional marketing may be costly, but you 
can achieve good results with smart ideas. 


or other incenti 
Get the word out on 
paid-for social media 
through your website, 
or with local flyers 
and marketing. 


have occurred, and which group is most 
valuable to your business. By always 
knowing who your potential customers 
are, and understanding their buying 
habits, you can target them. 


Becoming more visible 
Boost your presence in the places 
where your customers like to shop, 
whether virtually or face to face. Runa 
paid social-media marketing campaign 
containing compelling or educational 
content, or an offer—starting small and 
analyzing the response rate—and list 
your location on all popular and free 
online business directories and maps. 


Ways to increase your 
customer appeal 


Many of the methods for bringing new 
customers to your business will cost very 
little, other than your time. Brainstorm 
with staff, friends, and family to generate 
and improve ideas. Research what other 
successful businesses have done. Make 
the most of staff who understand and 
engage with social media, and sustain 

a genuine interest in your industry and 
customer communities. 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 19 Q /? il ele yy) 
Attracting New Business 


Increase referrals 
Tap in to your existing 
customer base by 
rewarding them when 
they refer their friends 
and make a purchase. 
Giving both parties a 
reward will build 
goodwill in your 
customer community. 


Target specific 
audiences 
Reach your specific 
audience by tailoring 
targeted advertising 
campaigns 
(see pp.138-139). For 
example, sponsor a 
social media influencer 
to promote your brand 
(see box, left). 


es 
Find a partner 


Collaborating with a 
complementary 
business enables you 
and your partner to 
market to one another's 
customers, and to 
benefit from each 
other's experience 
and expertise. 

Build a network 


Consider joining trade 
bodies, chambers of 
commerce, and 
networking groups to 
gain ideas and win new 
clients. Sponsor 
activities for your 
customer or client 
community to make a 
direct connection. 


Promote your 
website 


Refine your SEO 
(see pp.118-119), 
thinking about the 
words your customers Monitor online 
might use to find you. feedback 
Analyze social media 
content that gets the 
best response, and 
create similar material. 


Keep an eye on your 
online ratings and 
reviews. Deal with any 
complaints right away, 
and respond to positive 
comments. Link good 
reviews on external 
sites to your website 
and social media. 


Retaining Your 
+4) Customers 


Surviving in your first year of business depends not only on 
building your customer base but also on prioritizing customers 
who consistently spend the most and ensuring they stay with you. 


Know your customers cheaper to keep existing customers customers face-to-face, asking 
Establishing a loyal customer than to acquire new ones, which for honest feedback, and analyze 
base can bring rewards to your may require considerable customer interactions online (see 
business. Research by the Harvard marketing effort and cost. pp.140-141). Armed with good 
Business School suggests that a To retain your most valued information, you can tailor your 

5 percent increase in customer customers, you need to engage product or service to meet specific 
retention can increase profit by with them and find out what needs of your customers, so they 
as much as 95 percent. It can be interests them. Talk to your feel valued and value you in return. 


How to keep 


your customers Relating to your customers 


There are two key ways of keeping > Support a cause your customers beyond your direct product 
your customers loyal. The first can relate to, such as sustainable offering, such as blogs, useful 
involves improving your relationship sourcing of goods or community tips, quizzes, and competitions. 
with customers by personalizing their projects and promot tome > Be transparent with customers, 
experience and helping them feel eustomiels always rel sued apou sharing the efforts that go on 
connected to your brand or business. Bays YOUn gods Or SeIViCEs behind the scenes, to reinforce 
The second involves maintaining the > Personalize communications the integrity and quality of your 
quality of your product or service with your customers, using their product and the team behind it. 
To do this, keep a keen eye on what preferred means of contact, such Reward customers through 
goes on behind the scenes in your ee Sia ae NINES loyalty bonuses and offers, 
business. Regularly analyze your ) Inform and entertain customers refer-a-friend schemes, 

with relevant additional content and personalized discounts. 


supply chain and look for ways 
to make it run as smoothly 
as possible (see pp.180-18)). 


Benefiting from loyalty 
Loyal customers are more likely 

to buy higher-priced or additional 
products or services from you. For 
example, you could propose a more 
expensive product to them—known 
as upselling—such as a higher 
specification cell phone. You could 
also entice a loyal customer with 
an additional product—known as 
cross-selling—such as a screen 
saver for a cell phone. Making 
recommendations and suggestions 
throughout the buying experience, 
right up to checkout, are simple 
ways to upsell or cross-sell. 


> Prioritize customer service 
and response times. Offer staff 
bonuses, tied to meeting customer 
service performance targets. 


» Respond immediately when 
a customer makes contact. If 
something goes wrong, apologize 
right away and rectify the problem 
as soon as possible. 


> Make it easy for customers to buy 
from you, with a fast, secure, and 


Optimizing your customer services 


> Use analytics tools, such as 


> Set targets for efficiency and 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 200 J 20 1 ))) 
Retaining Your Customers 


Asimple equation can show you, as a percentage, how effective you are 
at keeping customers. It is known as the customer retention rate, or CRR. 
If your CRR percentage goes down over a particular period, you may have 
a customer retention problem that will need fixing. If the percentage goes 
up, you are becoming more successful at retaining customers, and this 
should be reflected in increased sales. 


Customer retention rate (CRR) 
S = number of customers at the 
start of a specific period 

E = number of customers at the 
end of that period 

N = number of new customers 
acquired during that period 


F | x100 


CRR = [ 


“It can cost five 
times more to 
attract a new 
customer than it 
does to retain an 
existing one.” 


www.forbes.com, 2018 


flexible payment process. Always 
be available to answer queries. 


Google Analytics (see pp.212-215), 
to monitor website and social media 
interactions and continually learn 
about customer needs. 


speed in the flow of goods and 
services and their delivery. When 
targets are not met, investigate. 


Changing 
‘8 Your Direction 


When business conditions change, you may feel a sense 
of panic. However, you can use such times to reinvent 
yourself and to set off in a new, better direction. 


Changing circumstances 
Staying alert to early signs of a change in business 
conditions enables you to take action before it is too 
late. Change may be dramatic and unexpected or the 
result of an evolving retail climate, new technology, 
regulatory updates, or increased competition. General 
Motors, which led the US auto industry for almost a 
century, collapsed because it ignored its customers’ 
needs and failed to embrace new technologies and 
improve quality. As a small business, you may not have 
huge resources, but this can work to your advantage. 
You have the benefit of being lean, naturally agile, 

and able to adjust quickly in the face of change. 


Ways of changing 


To meet the challenge of a changing environment, you 
may decide to adapt, pivot, or diversify. Adapting means 
making small changes to your existing business strategy, 
continually refining your product and sales approach. 
Pivoting means adopting a new business model or 
strategy. Diversifying means broadening the scope of 
your business to offer different types of goods 

or services. In this example, the owner of a restaurant 
adapts, pivots, and diversifies in response to three 
different changes in her business environment. 


PIVOT 


In response to strong competition from 
a new restaurant nearby, Rowena decides 
to change her restaurant into a cookery 
school offering classes in fine cuisine. She 
also posts how-to videos on social media. 


zo ranfoneeng hyperfine" 2. 3 a | 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 202 / y) @ 3 yy) 


Changing Your Direction 


Considering your options ig 
Whatever the cause of the change in the business CASE STUDY 


climate, first address its effect on your business, and i 
: ; oe ; Stagekings 
then identify any opportunities that it could create. seeeeectmennnsececcnnnenneneccevsnnneeeecensnnasececcarsnnngseeecaesisest eeeeernnseeneeetny 
Talk to staff or colleagues, collectively assess your In the face of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic, specialist 
resources, then brainstorm and research ideas to designers os theater and yy gy Stagekings, aoe 
and uti nae ffici eae d themselves idle as the Australian entertainment 
nd a solution that 1s cost-ellicient, timely, and meets industry closed down. The company responded to 


the unexpected circumstances by pivoting. They 
thought about the needs of the millions of office staff 
now working from home, and deployed their skills to 
create a range of work-from-home desks. 


clearly defined market needs. The solution may require 
adjustments to your product (adapting), taking a 

new direction (pivoting), or adding new products 
(diversifying). Aim to build on what you have already 
learned rather than starting over from scratch. 


YZ NEED TO KNOW 


> Black 
ROWE N A'S Ceiba eA could 
not have been predicted. 
COOKIN G SCH O OL > Horizontal diversification 
involves replicating your product, 
such as by opening more stores. 


> Vertical diversification involves 
taking ownership of a part of your 
supply chain. 


| 


“All failure 
is failure to 


adapt.” 


The Art of Winning in 
an Age of Uncertainty, 
Max McKeown, 2012 


DIVERSIFY 
To increase profits in the face of strong 
competition, Rowena cooks and packs 
her delicious sauces, dried herbs, and 
flavored oils. She uses social media to 


publicize the new range. fill. 
f 


Ce a errr TEER El REET pees 8 pstrseeate em 


[us 


» Managing 
tt) Change 


Anticipating change and managing it successfully are key to 
running a business. Take a methodical approach, with clear steps, 
and you can adapt successfully to new business conditions. 


Reasons for change For example, new technology or unexpectedly, an environmental 

When you start a business, making "shifting consumer trends could crisis could throw the markets 

any significant changes inthe short lead to significant rises or falls into total chaos. 

to medium term may be the last in demand for your products or 

thing on your mind. But external services. Alternatively, you Planning for change 

and internal factors can affect what might have to comply with new If you prepare in advance to handle 

your business offers at any time, so regulations in your industry, set change and put a logical process in 

being able to adjust is essential. by the government. Or, even more place, you will be ready to adapt 
Managing the 

change process 

When a business is faced with 

change, it needs the support OUTLINE 

and enthusiasm of everyone THE PLAN 

involved to guarantee a positive Set out a course of action. 
outcome. For this to happen, it List what changes need to \ 
is important that you, as leader occur at each level of the \ 
of the business, are open and ASSESS business. Think about what points 
transparent about why change THE CHANGE staff may be resistant to and how 


is happening. Engaging staff, 
important clients, and any 
affected business associates, 
such as suppliers or investors, 
is also critical. If you actively 
involve them in the steps you 
take, they are more likely to 
support the changes required 
and contribute to a smooth 
development of the business. 


Identify the business goals > OD ied ence 

that the change should deliver. 

Consider how quickly you will 
need to implement change, 
whether it will be gradual or 

sudden, and who it will affect. 


and move forward when the time 
comes. By providing a clear action 
plan, “change management” helps 
minimize the risk of failure. The 
media giant Netflix is an example 
of a business transformed through 
careful change management. In 
2007, after 10 years operating as 

a DVD rental service, the company 
moved to digital streaming in 
response to emerging technology. 
Netflix managed this change 
carefully from the outset, with 
clear communication to its whole 
workforce, ensuring a highly 


successful and lucrative transition. 


always 
opportunities. 


Minoru Makihara, Japanese 
industrialist, 1996 


COMMUNICATE 
AND ENGAGE 


Explain clearly to staff and 
business associates why change 
is necessary, how it will affect 
them day-to-day, and how you 
will support them. Encourage 
feedback and answer y 
any concerns. 


° 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 
Managing Change 


COCR OOOO THOSE EA HEH HOE ESTHET OS EESH ESOT EEESESESSEESEE ESE ESHEOEESESEE ORE EESESOHESEOEEOSESEEES 


MAKING IT WORK 


204/205 DE 


Before introducing changes to your business, develop a plan that 
acknowledges the practical and emotional implications. 


Practical action 


> Schedule milestones at which you 
can assess the impact of the change 
and spot potential problems. 

> Review progress weekly, and keep 
staff and all stakeholders informed. 

>» Remain calm if change takes longer 
than expected. A longer wait with 
the support of employees might be 
more effective than rushed change. 


Where 
changes, 


IMPLEMENT 
AND EMBED 


Introduce changes, following 
your formal plan. Make sure 
staff receive any new training or 
equipment they need. Encourage 
and motivate staff, giving them 
recognition for each step of the 
change achieved. 


as an engaged and decisive 
leader of the business and 
learn from any mistakes—made 
by you as well as staff. Continue to 
engage employees, not only 
during the change period but 
also in the long term. 


Emotional awareness 


> Thank your staff through regular 
emails and informal meetings. 


> Reinforce the reasons for change 
regularly to remind your team why 
change will make working life better. 


) Reward colleagues for their service 
if the change involves letting anyone 
go, and help them find new jobs 
through networking or agencies. 


MONITOR 
Set a good example 


° 


Licensing 


Once you are up and running, licensing is a way to grow your 
business. As a licensor, others pay to use your ideas, or as a licensee, 
you can pay to use other peoples’ creative output. 


Becoming a licensor 

Some entrepreneurs do not sell 

a tangible product. Instead, they 
sell the use of their intellectual 
property (IP) to other parties. IP 
includes virtual creations, such 

as designs, music, photographs, 
illustrations, written text, software, 


How licensing works 


Licensing is a legal agreement between the 
person who holds the IP (the licensor) and 

the person or business who uses or sells that 
intellectual property to a wider market (the 
licensee). The licensor assigns rights to the 
licensee for a particular purpose and specifies 
the territories they can sell in. In return, the 
licensee pays a fee or percentage of any profits 
made. A licensee can also use IP as the basis 


of another product. For example, an 


and technical inventions. Under the 
licensing model, the licensor still 
owns their IP but allows someone 
else (the licensee) to use it under 
agreed terms, for a set period, and 
in return for a fee. For example, if 
you create a fictional character, you 
could sell a license allowing 


another business to use it, such as 
in their branding, or to produce 
merchandising products. 


Being a licensee 

Licensing gives licensees access to 
new ideas, concepts, and creations 
without needing to generate them. 


illustrator might create an image that they 
license to a clothing manufacturer who 
prints it on a T-shirt and sells it (see right). 


You can license a range of different 
kinds of IP, from virtual creations 
to physical products. For example 
you may be a software designer 
who licenses a new program out to 
universities. You might be a wildlife 


photographer who licenses your 
photo collection to a commercial 
picture agency. Or you may have 
invented a new gadget, then sell a 
license to an established company 
to distribute as part of their range. 


STEPS FOR THE LICENSOR 


Register your chosen product 

Before registering your IP, ensure 
that existing patents and copyrights 
(see pp.96-97) do not prevent you 
from developing your ideas. 


2 Develop your USP 
The more innovative your 
idea, the more valuable it is to the 
licensee. Research the market to find 
out just how unique (see pp. 24-25) 
your offering is. 


Identify potential licensees 
Investigate who is selling or 
creating products in the same industry 
as yours. Visit the websites of trade 
shows for exhibitor lists to identify 
contacts to approach. 


4 Approach and pitch 

Make contact with the potential 
licensees you identify. Ask permission 
to send samples and let your idea 

sell itself. 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 


tiomsing 200/207 IE 


However, they must have the skills 
and resources required to make use 
of the IP, and to fulfil the terms of 
the license. As such, licensors tend 
to choose established companies to 
license to, who are more likely to 
succeed and generate higher sales. 
To be a licensee you generally 
have to be in a good financial 
position. You will also need a 
good track record in your industry, 
otherwise licensors may not be 
willing to license to you. 


STEPS FOR THE LICENSEE 


1 Decide which product 
you want to license 
If you lack the resources necessary to 
develop an idea from scratch, such as 
an artwork or logo, look for potential 
licensors in that field or industry. 


> Prepare a profile 
Put together a detailed 
description of your company. Include 
current products, details about your 
market, and your manufacturing and 
production resources. 


Getting the right licence 
IP is protected by law (see pp.96— 
97) in order to stop others simply 
copying it without your permission. 
There are four main types of IP 
licence. Copyright applies to 
artistic works such as literature, 
music, photographs, and website 
designs; a patent applies to 
technology; a trademark protects 
brands, including the logo; whereas 
a registered design covers the look 
of a product. 


3 Secure funding 
Calculate your expected profit, 
prepare your accounts, and approach 
lenders or investors, if needed. 


Search sources 

Look for potential licensors. 
Explore international licensing 
exhibitions, patent registers, and agents. 


Contact preferred 

licence holder 
Gather information from the licence 
holder to assess how their IP compares 
against the rest of the market. 


iv NEED TO KNOW 


> Advance is the payment made 
from the licensee to the licensor, 
usually when they sign the 
licensing agreement. 


> Infringement refers to 
unauthorized use of someone 
else's IP, or the making of 
counterfeit products. 


> Licensing agreement is the 
contract between licensor and 
licensee that becomes legally 
binding once both parties sign. 


> Sublicensee is an extra (third 
party) licensee appointed by 
the main licensee. This may be 
for production or marketing 
purposes, for example. 


> Territories are the countries 
or market region in which the 
licensee will use the licensor’s IP. 
> Trade secrets are another 
kind of IP, usually some type of 
commercially valuable “know- 
how” or formula. 


6 Determine how successful 
the product will be 
Assess any practical issues around 
introducing the product into your 
proposed market area. Prepare the 
relevant figures for negotiation. 


Negotiate costs 

Agree on an annual fees or 
royalties with the licensor. Decide who 
will benefit if you develop the original 
IP further. 


Selling Your Business 


There may come a time when you choose to sell your business. This is 
likely to be a difficult decision, but with careful planning and research, 
you can make the process as smooth—and as profitable—as possible. 


Organizing the sale 
Selling your business depends on you being able to 
convincingly state why you are selling. You may be 
retiring, taking up another opportunity, or perhaps 
splitting with partners and making a fresh start—all 
plausible reasons that are easy to convey. Be honest 
with all parties about your finances to encourage trust; 
if your business has not made a profit, call it a going- 
out-of-business sale to encourage a quick transaction. 
A broker or agent can help communicate with 
potential buyers and identify those who are genuine, 
especially if your business is large or high value. 
Seek advice from several brokers, and choose one who 
gives a realistic valuation. Listen to their views, and 
consider the sales results of similar businesses that 
have recently sold, or the cost of those on the market 
currently, and any local factors that may impact price. 
For example, if your business is a burger bar and a new 
university is about to open in the neighborhood, use 
this information to support your asking price. 


In the world of commercial transactions, “due diligence” 
is the term used for a review of the financial records of a 
business. Carried out before a contract is signed, it helps 
the buyer identify any risks or problems. 


> Ask potential buyers to sign a nondisclosure 
agreement before allowing them access to your 
business data. 


> Approach the sale from the buyer's perspective 
and prepare an honest analysis of the business. 

> Put together a seller's pack with all the financial 
details the buyer will need to make a decision. 

> Identify your business assets, liabilities, sales, gross 


profits, rates of return, accounts receivable, and other 
key accounting measures. 


> Be ready for any questions from the buyer, and do 
not attempt to conceal negative information. 


Choosing when to sell 

Industry estimates put the average selling time for 

a business at six months to a year, so it is not worth 
rushing—advance planning and patience will 
maximize your chances of success. If potential buyers 
feel you are desperate to sell, you are unlikely to 
achieve a good price. Seasonal timing may also be 
important for introducing your listing to the market. 
For example, an ice-cream business will logically 
attract more attention in summer than in winter. 


Preparing to sell 


It is essential that you prepare thoroughly for a commercial 
sale. Think about how to improve sales revenue well in 
advance. Decide whether you will manage the process 
yourself or engage a broker. Research your market, prepare 
financial figures, and develop a pitch. This will set you up 
with the best chance of attracting a committed buyer. 


GROWING THE BUSINESS 20 Q / ? 09 ))) 
Selling Your Business 


POPC CEOS HST O EE HEH HOE ESTHET OTEEEH EOS EESHES ESS ESHE EE OE ESOS ESESET ORE EESESO ESE SESE SESEOES 


1 Valuing the business 
\\\\_ ) Calculate the value of your business. A rough estimate 


| 2 a of this would be three times annual profit, but this will 
rr vary widely and depend on market conditions. 
ag reed » Research the prospects of your market sector and take 
d | into account how this might affect your valuation. 
€alis never > Be honest about figures, even if you are losing money. 


close, as 


2 Preparing documents and contracts 


d >» Compile records documenting the financial history 
ue : of the business, and seek advice regarding the tax 
; implications of your sale. 


d I | ige n ce stage > List all of the assets that will be included in the sale. 


Benchmark International, 2020 > Include any regulatory certificates and licenses for your 
business premises. 


3 Finding a buyer 
> Seek professional help through a broker, who can 
provide advice and guide you through the selling process. 


> Continue your involvement in the sale and actively 
promote it, even if you are using a broker. 


> Screen potential buyers to make sure they are genuine. 


4 Negotiating an agreement 


> Research your buyer, and decide on the minimum figure 
| q you would accept from them. 


> Discuss the deal structure, including the payout, and the 
shares or assets to be transferred. 


> Agree on a handover process, including what will happen 
to existing staff. 


5 Managing the profits 


» Take time to consider what you will do with the sale 
Lj proceeds instead of spending them right away. 
> Set out your financial goals, such as retirement or 


paying off debt, and plan for them. 


+t) Moving On 


It can be difficult to give up a venture you have nurtured from the start, 
but eventually someone else may need to take over. Start succession 
planning early so that you are well prepared when you step away. 


Choosing a successor 

Preparing to hand over control is a challenging task for 
any business—whether you plan to sell your business, 
retain ownership but hire someone else to run the 
operation, or bring in a family member. There could be 
a number of reasons to seek a successor. You may be 
ready to retire or want to spend more time on personal 
projects, or you may have achieved all of your goals 
and decides to focus your attention on exciting new 
ventures. If your business is stagnating, it could 
benefit from a transfer of power. Whether you have run 
out of steam or are busy with other new projects, 


succession can provide a chance to find someone with 
different strengths ready to help expand the business 
and bring fresh energy and ideas. 

Succession planning is not just a task for the end 
of your career. It should be considered well before 
retirement. An unexpected event could leave your 
business without clear leadership, so you need a 
backup plan to keep the operation running in your 
absence, for the benefit of both your employees and 
family. Consider the shape you would like your 
business to take when you have moved on. To preserve 
the value of your business, it is vital that whoever 


Handing over 


Start the process of handing over control by reviewing 
your existing leadership practices. Assess the qualities and 
skills required in a leader for your business, and look within 
your workforce to see whether an existing colleague would 
make a suitable candidate. Before you approach a potential 
successor, set a salary level and any benefits you are 
prepared to offer. 


| | a 
Review the Constructa Consider the 
existing leadership leadership profile potential candidates 


> Establish who will most be 


affected by a leadership change. 


> Determine which qualities 
staff would want to see in 
their new boss. 


> Reflect on the attributes 
required to preserve and 
develop the business. 


> Compile a profile of skills and 


experience your successor needs. 


> Consider leadership potential of 
existing staff or family members. 


) Look beyond the business if 
necessary, to find recruits with 
required skills. 


GROWING YOUR BUSINESS 
Moving On 


210/211 


COCR O OOO T HEE EE HEHHEOEEETH ST OTEESH ESOT E ESHEETS SESE ESS ESHEOEESTSSEOEEEESESOHESE SESE SESEOES 


takes over respects what it represents and has the 
skills and drive to build on that. Identify staff or family 
members who show the potential to lead the business. 
If you feel none have the right abilities, be prepared 

to look for people beyond the business. Cultivating a 
successor should be part of the management process. 


Stepping back 

Ideally, your exit should be planned in stages, giving 
the new leader a chance to settle in and win the trust 
of staff and key customers. Step out of the picture 
gradually, reducing your days in the office, for example, 
but do not linger too long, or your successor may feel 
hampered by your presence. The timing will depend 
on the identity of your successor—an existing member 
of staff who has worked closely with you may need far 
less time to get up to speed than an outside recruit. 


have 
no succession plan 


Wilmington Trust, 2018 


Develop your 
successor’s skills 


> Train your successor in the new 
skills required, exposing them 
to all business areas. 


> Provide ongoing mentoring 
to build their confidence. 


Prepare for the 
final handover 


> Start to allow your successor 
freedom to operate. 


> Phase your exit if your 
successor expresses a need 
for ongoing support. 


An important part of your exit strategy is to plan for 
how your next venture or retirement will be funded. 


> Start planning early, when you set up the business. 


> Have an idea of the milestones you want to reach 
before you step away, or at what age you would like to 
retire, and how much capital you would need to fund 
your next project or desired lifestyle. 


» Get advice on the tax advantages and rate of return 
for different types of pensions. 

> Build savings into the business plan so that money is 
regularly paid from the profits into a pension fund and 
savings accounts. 


>» Make a will to ensure your family is provided for. 


> Review and assess successors’s 
performance before your final exit. 


» Avoid the temptation to interfere 
once you have left—let your 
successor make the key decisions. 


Resources 


In general, you should start with the 
federal agency or information center 
for a topic, but then look at the 
commerce and small business offices 
for your state, which often have 
extra and necessary information 

and regulations. 


Registering your business name 

Check that your proposed name is not too similar to 
an existing business by searching company registers 
in the relevant state/region. 


US 

Choose your business name. 
www.sba.gov/business-guide/launch-your-business/ 
choose-your- business-name 

Canada 

Choose and register your business name. 
www.canada.ca/en/services/business/start/choosing-a- 
business-name-3.html 


Registering your business 
You may have to register your business with the 
government to make it a distinct legal entity. 


US 

Register your business. How and where you need to 
register depends on your business structure and 
business location. 
www.sba.gov/business-guide/launch-your-business/ 
register-your- business 

Canada 

Register your business with the government. 
www.canada.ca/en/services/business/start/register-with- 
gov.html 


Setting up nonprofit organizations 
Nonprofit organizations may have different set-up 
requirements from conventional businesses. 


US 

Starting a nonprofit organization 
www.usa.gov/start-nonprofit 

Canada 

Creating a not-for-profit corporation 
www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/cd-dgc.nsf/eng/cs04970.html 


Creating a business plan 
A business plan forms the foundation of a business. 
Templates can help in the efficient writing of a plan. 


US 

Write your business plan—information and business 
templates 
www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-business/ 
write-your-business-plan 

Canada 

Assessing your readiness, choosing a business structure, 
market research, and writing a business plan 
www.canada.ca/en/services/business/start/planning.html 


Business licenses and permits 
Local and national permits and licenses may apply to 
your business. 


US 

Apply for federal and state licenses and permits. 
www.sba.gov/business-guide/launch-your-business/ 
apply-licenses-permits 

Canada 

Permits, licenses, and regulations 
www.canada.ca/en/services/business/permits.html 


Business insurance requirements 

There are no national general requirements for 
business insurance, so check state and local 
requirements as well as requirements or suggestions 
by industry association. 


US 

A guide to types of business insurances 
www.sba.gov/business-guide/launch-your-business/ 
get-business- insurance 


HOW TO START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 


Canada 

There are no general requirements, but this is a 
good breakdown of the types available. 
www.ibc.ca/on/business 


Income tax 
The percentage of tax paid on income varies 
according to income and local law. 


US 

Taxes—filing, small business taxes, state and local taxes, 
tax return status 

www.usa.gov/taxes 

Canada 

Personal, business, corporation, and trust income tax 
www.canada.ca/en/services/taxes/income-tax.html 


Goods and services tax (GST) 
Taxes added to the sale price of goods 
and services. 


US 

There is no set national sales tax; sales tax is added at 
state level. 
search.usa.gov/earch?affiliate=usagov&query=sales+tax 
Canada 

Goods and services tax (GST) and Harmonized sales tax 
(HST) 

www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/services/tax/ 
businesses/topics/gst-hst- businesses. html 


Importing and exporting 
Licenses and permits may be required for exporting 
and importing goods. 


US 

Learning the basics and obtaining licenses and permits 
www.usa.gov/import-export 

Canada 

Guide to importing and exporting 
www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/services/tax/ 
businesses/topics/registering-your-business/import-export- 
program-account.html 


DAWA BAe: 


Resources 


Intellectual property (IP) rights 
Trademarks, copyright, design, patents 


US 

The Office of International Intellectual Property 
Enforcement (IPE) 
www.state.gov/intellectual-property-enforcement 
Canada 

Canadian Intellectual Property Office 
www.cipo.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/cipolnternet-Internetopic.nsf/ 
eng/home 

International 

World Intellectual Property Office provides a list of all 
national IP offices. 

www.wipo.int/directory/en/urls.jsp 


Labor laws 

Legal aspects of taking on employees or hiring 
freelance help—types of employment contracts. 
Legal responsibilities to your staff—advice on giving 
notice and avoiding wrongful dismissal. 


US 

Labor laws and issues 

www.usa.gov/labor-laws 

Canada 

Federal labor standards 
www.canada.ca/en/services/jobs/workplace/federal- 
labour-standards.html 


Avoiding discrimination in the workplace 
Employers have a duty to prevent and tackle 
discrimination at work. 


US 

US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
www.eeoc.gov/employers 

Canada 

Rights in the workplace 
www.canada.ca/en/canadian-heritage/services/rights- 
workplace.html 


Health and safety 

Ensure that your workplace meets the legal 
safety requirements set by your government 
and local authorities. 


US 

Workplace health and safety 
www.dol.gov/general/topic/safety-health 

Canada 

Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety 
www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/legis|/intro.htm! 


Retail law 

Retail laws vary widely by state and local 
municipality, and the best resource for 
following laws to sell retail is a local lawyer 
who specializes in small retail businesses. 


Consumer protection/rights 
Understand how local consumer law affects 
your business. 


US 

The Bureau of Consumer Protection prevents 
fraudulent business practices and educates 
businesses about their rights and responsibilities. 
www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau- 
consumer-protection 

Canada 

Consumer protection legislation in Canada 
www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/Oca-bc.nsf/eng/ca02965.html 


Data protection 


There is no one law protecting data and businesses, 


but there are many industry- and state-specific 
protection laws. 


US 

The Federal Trade Commission oversees compliance 
with privacy and data protection laws and regulations. 
www.ftc.gov 

Canada 

Privacy laws for businesses 

www. priv.gc.ca/en/for- businesses 


Cybersecurity 

If your business handles personal data, you have 
a legal responsibility to protect that data from 
cyber attacks. 


US 

Stay safe from cybersecurity threats 
www.sba.gov/business-guide/manage-your-business/ 
stay-safe-cybersecurity-threats 

Canada 

Cybersecurity for small business 
cyber.gc.ca/en/guidance/c yber-security-small- business 


Environmental law 
You must follow local environmental standards 
and laws. 


US 

US Environmental Protection Agency 
www.epa.gov/laws-regulations 

Canada 

Acts and Regulations: Environment and Climate 
Change Canada 
www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/ 
corporate/transparency/acts-regulations.html 


Getting green accreditation 
Look into the requirements for your region and 
industry-specific accreditation. 


US 

Green America 
www.greenamerica.org/green-america-green-business- 
certification 

Canada 

There is no central Canadian accreditation agency 
for general business but there are many industry- 
specific ones. 

International 

Green Seal—global but headquartered in US 
www.greenseal.org 


HOW TO START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 


Market research 
Information on conducting market research and 
obtaining relevant statistics 


US 

Market research and competitive analysis 
www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-business/ 
market-research-competitive-analysis 


TEMPLATES AND TOOLS 


Hundreds of free and reasonably priced templates 
and software programs are available for small 
businesses, which can save you time and energy. 
As soon as you begin planning your business, 

join local business owners’ groups on social media, 
and ask for recommendations for the programs and 
templates that will be the most useful to you. Here 
are some programs that apply to a wide range of 
business types: 


Graphics 

If you need to make graphics, you can use a program 
like Canva to create professional-looking graphics 
and marketing materials with a consistent look. For 
themed memes, the WordSwag app lets you create 
consistent, clean memes from your phone. 


Marketing and social media marketing 

You will need to market your business by email, 
using a program that can collect opt-ins from 

your customers. ConvertKit, MailChimp, and Kartra 
are popular programs that maintain your lists and 
send emails. If you are selling to consumers, you 
will need to do social media marketing, too. Your 
email marketing program may be able to integrate 


214/215 


Resources 


Canada 

Canadian industry statistics 
www.ic.gc.ca/app/scr/app/cis/search-recherche?lang=eng 
Conducting market research 
www.canada.ca/enfservices/business/research/ 
conductingmarketresearch.html 


your social media campaigns, but also consider 
stand-alone programs such as Hootsuite, Later, 
or Tailwind. 


Search engine optimization (SEO) 

Programs like Google Search and Moz can help you 
improve your SEO to get more targeted traffic to your 
site and help you plan content and ad campaigns that 
combine with your static site content. 


Analytics 

Google Analytics is a free program that can track 
where your website traffic comes from and what 
people do when they get to your site. Even if you don’t 
have much traffic to your site, it is worth installing so 
you have the numbers as you grow. 


Bookkeping 

QuickBooks, FreshBooks, and NetSuite are three 
common, easy-to-use small business bookkeeping 
systems that will keep you organized. 


Market research 

If you are doing market research, you can use survey 
programs such as Survey Monkey or Google Forms to 
collect and organize responses. 


Index 


Page numbers in bold refer to 
main entries. 


accelerators 85 
access, workspace 113 
accountants 51, 88, 90 
accounts 15, 77, 88-89 
achievement, culture of 171 
action plans, writing 106-107 
“add-on” products and services 192 
advances 207 
advantage, creating competitive 22 
advertising 35, 105, 190 

action plans 107 

choosing your channel 138-39 

costs 79 

key performance indicators (KPIs) 

154 

promoting awareness 67, 118 

on social media 119, 141 

targeted campaigns 199 
advocates 149 
affiliate businesses 35, 115 
after-purchase support 149 
agencies 35 
agents, paying 73 
algorithms 68, 118, 187 
Allegro 34 
alliances 150-51, 156 
Amazon 13, 66, 69, 161 
analytics tools 141, 152, 187, 198, 201 
Ansoff, Igor 194 
Ansoff Matrix 194 
anti-discrimination laws 129 
anxiety 172, 173 
Apple Inc. 15, 59 
appraisals, performance 176 
apps 147, 186, 187 
artistic abilities 14 
assessing yourself 14 
assets 78, 82, 89, 90, 158, 159 
attitudes, positive 162 
avatars 41 
Avon 34 
awards, applying for 157 
awareness, promoting 67 


bait and hook model 35 

balance, work-life 52-53 

Ban Ki-moon 101 

banks: bank loans 82, 89, 161, 196 
investments 84, 85 


setting up business accounts 92-93 


taking customer payments 72, 73 
behavioral factors 40, 41 
belonging, sense of 12 
Bezos, Jeff 13 
billboards 138 
black swan events 203 
Blanchard, Ken 177 
blogs 135, 141 
books: balancing 88-89 

bookkeeping 158 
bootstrapping 82 
boundaries, setting 52, 54 
Brand, Stewart 187 
Brand Identity Prism 61 
brands and branding: boosting your 

62-63, 136 

choosing names 58 

creating 60-61 

franchises 30, 31 

generating interest in 136-37 

mission statements and 25 

rrademarks 59, 61, 96 
Branson, Sir Richard 137, 151, 167 
bricks and clicks 34 
broad targeting 119 
brokers 35, 208 
budgets 14, 160-61, 196 
uffet, Warren 89 
uildings insurance 95 
urn rate 161 
usiness angels 85 
siness cards 142 
siness culture 162-63 
usiness essentials, buying 76-77 
usiness format franchise 30 
siness interruption insurance 94 
siness models 34-35, 38 
usiness plans 104-105, 107, 197 
usiness-to-business (B2B) sales 38, 

39, 82 


business-to-business-to-consumer 
(B2B2C) 38, 39 
business-to-consumer (B2C) sales 38 
businesses: buying 27, 192 
defining your business 36 
expanding 192-93 
growing your 190-91 
improving 182-83 
selling 208-209 
working with other 150-51 
buying: buying businesses 27, 192 
buying habits 131 
buy-sell agreements 55 
buzz, creating a 136-37 


capital 193 
capital gains tax (CGT) 90 
carbon footprints 100 
cash flow 159, 179, 191, 196 
forecast 105 
managing 160-61 
projections 83 
repayment schedules 83 
statement of 89 
cash payments 73 
causes, supporting good 200 
certification 19 
challenges, new 168 
change: anticipating and managing 
204-205 
changing direction 202-203 
reasons for change 204 
characteristics, personal 14 
charities 27, 32, 33 
charters, family 28, 29, 55 
checklists, “good idea” 16-17 
checks 73 
childcare 53 
Chopra, Manish 66 
Christensen, Clayton 132 
cinema advertising 138 
circumstances, changing 202-203 
clients see customers 
cloud services 186 
Coca-Cola 16, 59 


code of conduct 102-103 
collaborations 150-51, 156, 175, 199 
commission 159 
commodity 64, 65 
communication 15 
building customer relationships 148 
conflict and 55, 175 
customers and 64, 65 
dealing with crises 185 
e-communications 130 
good managers 127 
harnessing technology 186, 187 
maintaining 150 
networking 142 
personalizing communications 200 
staff well-being 172-73 
community: code of conduct 102 
community events and projects 
134, 200 
commuting 12, 44, 45 
competitions 135 
competitors 19 
assessing 22, 42, 47 
comparing yourself to 19 
competing on perceived value 36 
finding gaps in the market 
20-21 
identifying USPs 23 
learning from 70 
pitching for investment 86, 87 
remaining competitive 182-83 
strategies and 36, 190 
as threats to your business 155 
writing business plans 105 
complaints 130, 154, 201 
components, sourcing 48-49 
computers 76, 78, 186 
concepts 60, 157 
confidence, making the big leap 
12-13 
conflict, managing and resolving 56, 
174-75 
consumables 77, 79 
consumers: business-to-consumer 
(B2C) sales 38 
consumer watchdogs 108 
contacts 131, 134, 142, 156 
contingency 80, 161, 180 
contractors 26, 61, 78, 79 
contracts 50, 51, 76, 122 
control, increasing 12, 13 
convenience 64, 65 


HOW TO START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 


cookies 119 
cooperatives 27, 32 
copyright 96, 97 
corporation tax 59 
costs 64, 65, 76-79, 80 
business essentials 76-77, 159 
and cash flow 161 
estimating 78-79 
fixed costs 158, 160 
improving performance 183 
initial 78, 79 
investment and contingency 80 
ongoing 78, 79, 161 
understanding 158-59 
Coughter, Peter 87 
courier services 75 
creative thinking 15 
credit cards 82, 83, 92, 161 
credit scores 196 
credits 89 
crises, preparing for 184-85 
cross-border payment platforms 73 
cross-selling 201 
crowdfunding 82, 83, 84 
culture, establishing a shared 
162-63 
customers: attracting new 141, 
198-99 
building customer relationships 
146, 148-49 
calculating customer retention rate 
(CRR) 201 
code of conduct 103 
customer acquisition cost (CAC) 152 
customer data systems 120-21, 
130-31, 148 
customer feedback 154 
customer lifetime value (CLV) 152 
customer relationship management 
(CRM) 130-31 
customer satisfaction 19, 148, 154 
ustomer services 37, 51, 71, 147, 149, 
165, 201 
feedback 146, 147, 152 
finding target markets 20-21 
fulfilling orders 74-75 
identifying 40-41, 42, 46, 131 
increasing your customer appeal 
198-99 
loyalty 146-47, 200-201 
marketing campaigns 119 
promoting growth 190 


Qa 


Index 


216/217 MI 


relationships with brands 61 

retaining your 200-201 

selling process 66-67 

sticky customers 149 

targeting 40-41, 66 

understanding consumer rights 
108-109 


customization 153 
cybersecurity 120-21, 186 


data: customer data systems 


130-31 
data analytics 131, 153, 187 
data management platforms 119 
data protection 120-21, 186 


deadlines 106, 174, 175 
debit cards 92 

debits 89 

debt 82, 83 

deficit 161 

delegation 193 

deliveries 49, 75, 77, 102, 108 
demand, assessing 42-43 
demographic factors 40 
denial of service 121 
deposits, security 47 
depreciation 159 

design, branding 61 

desk research 42 
development 12, 156 


@e82828202RR20R00028 


igital wallets 73 


rect mail 138 

rect sales 34 

rection, changing 202-203 
sability 113, 125, 128, 129 
scipline 177 

scounts 71, 147, 198 
smissal 177 

sputes 54, 174-75 
stributors 48 


iversification 192, 195, 202, 203 
iversity 128-29 


ividends 80, 81, 89, 90, 91 


double-entry bookkeeping 88-89 
dreams, pursuing your 13 

drive 14, 171 

Drucker, Peter 19, 179 

due diligence 208 


well-being 52, 172-73 business essentials 76-77 


work-life balance 52 chasing payments 160 
e-commerce 34, 50, 68-69, 115 working with friends and family data protection 120-21 
search engine optimization (SEO) 69 Hise ee 
g Pp ee ae ’ | employers’ liability insurance 94 estimating earnings 80-81 

114, 116, 118, 199 . 
ene employment: pros and cons of 12 financial forecasts 105 
e-fulfillment companies 74-75 Jucieatenibonm Sane 
amet ee a entrepreneurs, social 33 financial risk 13 
aan ; ie einen 80-81 environmental issues 100-101, 102 financial security 12 

3 a 69 g epidemics, planning for 184 financing business growth 196-97 

. ay © ae equipment 18, 76, 99 finding investment 84-85 
selena a equity 89 funding your business 33, 82-87, 
i noes pete ; cd equity funding 82, 83, 84 104, 197 
GleVvalor PILCHEs a6, ethics 33. 49. 102-103 key performance indicators (KPIs) 
email marketing 50, 153, 154 Etsy 69 — 155 
area ae oe cenaiuaieE ze European Union, legislation 108 making predictions 159 

rand stories events 137 managing budgets and cash flow 

career development 102 ; . 160-61 
charters 28. 29 55 executive summaries 104 : 
oe exit strategies, planning 211 managing your 158-59, 165 


code of conduct 102-103 
contracts 51 

cybersecurity 121 
disability 113, 125, 128, 129 


expanding your business 192-93 pitching for investment 86-87 


expectations: exceeding 71 start-up costs 78-79 
high 21 types of financing 196-97 


identifying and managing 70, 74, 147 understanding business costs 


Soiies crunsuaeeieleareccoeal setting 170, 173, 176, 177 158-59 
diversity and inclusion 128-29 expenditure 89 vacation and sick pay 12, 13 
employers’ liability insurance 94 expenses 79, 90, 92, 105, 155, 158 writing business plans 105 


empowering 171 : i 
encouraging flexibility 167 exporting goods 49 pene ee 
expanding your business 193 fires 94, 98, 113, 184 
finding the right talent 122-23, first aid 99, 113, 173 

170-71 fit for purpose 109 
hiring a manager 126-27 fixed costs 158, 160 
identifying skills 164 Facebook 59, 140, 141 fixed-term contracts 122 
induction plans 125 Facebook marketplace 69 flexibility 12, 52, 167, 183 
investing in your team 166 failures, responsibility of 13 flooding 94, 184 
job descriptions 124 fairness 172 flyers 137, 152 
key performance indicators (KPIs) family: investments 84 focus groups 133 

155 promotion through 134 food industry 38, 98 
managing and resolving conflict work-life balance 52-53 forecasts, financial 105 

174-75 working with family 27, 28-29, forums 16, 135, 141 
managing change 204, 205 54-55 franchises 27, 30-1, 35 
managing staff performance 176-77 | fast-food chains 30 Franklin, Benjamin 107 
ongoing costs 79 faulty items, consumer rights 109 freelancers 26, 61, 122 
payrolls 51 feedback 71, 152, 154 freemium business models 35 
rapid company growth 191 acting on 146 friends: investments 84 
recruiting 51, 124-25 collecting 147 promotion through 134 
retaining talent 168-69 monitoring 199 working with 54-55 
rewarding 177, 205 staff 170 fulfillment management 74-75 
running a sales team 170-71 target audience 132 funding your business 33, 82-87, 104, 
safety procedures 98-99 fees, online selling 69 197 
valuing your 168 finances: accountants 51 fundraising 33 


wages 158, 159 balancing the books 88-89 furniture, office 78, 113 


Gandhi, Mahatma 175 
gas 99 
Gates, Bill 25 
gender 128, 129 
General Motors 202 
Generation X 40 
geographic factors 40 
giveaways 135, 136, 137 
global presence 193 
goals 106 
achieving your 13 
change and 204 
communicating your 36 
defining 24-25, 55, 171 
motivating staff 54, 177 
reviewing 157 
SMART 166-67 
Google 59, 69, 118 
Google Alerts 136 
Google Analytics 152, 198, 201 
Google Hangout 142 
Google Trends 141 
governance 33 
government: consumer rights 
108 
grants 85 
legal safety requirements 98 
grants 85, 197 
green issues 100-101 
gross profit 91, 105, 155 
growth: expanding your business 
192 
growing your business 190-91, 
194-97 
scalability 17, 19 


hardware, portable 186 

Harvard Business School 132, 200 
headhunting 51 

health and safety 112, 155, 173 
home, working from 44, 46, 52 
horizontal alliances 151 
horizontal diversification 203 
Hotmail 59 

human resources 164 

hygiene 98, 113, 184 


HOW TO START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 


ideas: borrowing from rivals 156 
capturing 162 
clarifying 42 
developing 14, 16-17, 42, 43 
organizing and rationalizing 162 
successfulness of 16 
unprotected 96 
identity, brand 61 
IKEA 58 
illustrations, protecting IP 96 
importing goods 49 
incentives 71 
inclusion 128-29 
income 89 
estimating 80 
financial security of 12 
income statements 89 
income taxes 91 
income versus investment 80 
recording 158 
required income 81 
self-employment and 13 
incorporated (Inc.) companies 59 
incubators 85 
inexperience 15 
influencers 41, 136 
brand stories and 63 
working with 135, 139, 141, 142, 198, 
199 
information: security of 120-21, 186 
infringement, licensing 207 
nnocent 16 
innovation 17 
nstagram 140, 141 
insurance 75, 77, 94-95, 109, 158 
intellectual property (IP): licensing 
206-207 
protecting 96-97 
terest, creating 67 
terest rates 84 


Sy 


Enforcement Network (ICPEN) 
108-109 
ventories 50, 51, 74,75, 78, 155 
vestment: business plans 104 
finding investment 84-85 
income versus investment 80 
investors 82, 84, 161, 179, 196, 197 
pitching for 86-87, 197 


= 


= 


nternational Consumer Protection and 


invoicing 160 
isolation, self-employment and 13 
IT 15, 76 
data protection 120-21 
equipment 78 
failure of 184 
management of 79, 165 
outsourcing 50 
workspace requirements 112 


Jefferson, Thomas 81 

job boards 123 

job satisfaction 13 

Jobs, Steve 15 

journals, recruiting through 123 


Kapferer, Jean-Noél 61 

Kaplan, Robert 8. 37 

key performance indicators (KPIs) 
154-55 

keyword targeting 118, 119 

Kilmann, Ralph 174 


language skills 14 

sauder, Estée 171 

aunch, preparing for 132-33 

Lauterborn, Robert F. 65 

eadership 15 

eads 131 

eases 47, 76 

edger books 88-89 

legal issues: consumer rights 108-109 
intellectual property (IP) 207 
legal advice 51 
legal protection insurance 94 
legal requirements 77, 79 
staff well-being 173 
trade secrets 97 

legislation 36, 177 

LEGO 59 

lenders 197 

liabilities 89 


Index x 2 1 8 / 2 19 } ) 


icensing 35, 49, 77, 95, 158, 206-207 
ifting and moving objects 99 
ighting 99, 113, 173 
imited (Ltd.) companies 26, 59 
imited liability companies (LLCs) 26, 
27 
LinkedIn 35, 123, 125, 140, 156 
iquidity 161 
iving costs 80, 81 
oans 84, 79 
ocal authorities: consumer rights 108 
grants 85 
legal safety requirements 98 
taxes 91 
location, importance of 47 
logistics 50, 51 
Lombardi, Vince 149 
loss 159, 161 
loyalty 190 
creating 71 
customer 146-47, 200-201 
loyalty programs 149, 157 
lunch breaks 52 


cDonald's 30 

a, Jack 22 

achinery, safety 99 

cKinsey & Co. 128 

agazine advertising 138 

ahesh Yogi, Maharishi 127 

ailings 137 

akihara, Minoru 205 

alware programs 121 

anagement: hiring managers 126-27 
managing your business 164-65 
staff performance 14, 176-77 
teams 166-67 

manufacture 30, 34, 48, 51 

marketing 190 
analyzing marketing responses 131 
building customer relationships 148 
business-orientated 64-65 
consumer-orientated 64-65 
costs 79 
creating marketing plans 157 
digital 187 
effectiveness of 152-53 
environmental considerations 76 


BBEBEBEBEE 


generating publicity 137 
investing in 152 
key performance indicators (KPIs) 
154 
management of 165 
marketing cycle 152 
marketing mix 64-65 
mission statements and 25 
organic marketing 134 
outsourcing 50 
prelaunch checks 133 
social media 198 
spreading the word 134-35 
understanding publicity 136 
websites and 119 
writing business plans 105 
marketplaces, online 69 
markets: analyzing 157 
attracting new customers 198, 199 
changing 43 
finding gaps in 16, 17, 20-21, 37 
knowing your 38-39 
market development 195 
mass markets 38, 39, 65 
niche markets 37, 38, 39, 65, 105 
researching 15, 16, 20, 153 
segmenting 40, 41 
target 20-21, 36, 131, 132, 153 
testing 157 
writing business plans 105 
material costs 79, 159 
McKeown, Max 203 
Mead, Margaret 165 
media coverage 135, 136, 137 
meditation and mindfulness 52 
mentors 85, 168, 191 
merchant service providers 72 
Microsoft 25 
Microsoft Teams 142 
milestones 205, 211 
millennials 40 
mission statements 25, 36, 33 
mistakes, responsibility of 13 
Mittal, Lakshmi 17 
mobile technology 139, 187 
momentum, maintaining 156-57 
money orders 73 
Monster 123 
motivation 12-13, 25, 30 
MUJI 137 
Multi-Ply Components 169 
Myers, Verna 129 


names 58-59, 61, 96 

narrow targeting 119 

natural disasters, planning for 184 

near-field communication (NFC) 
187 

needs: assessing your 50, 76, 79, 122, 
196 

understanding clients’ needs 71 

negotiation 14 

nepotism 27 

net profit 91, 105, 155 

net promoter score 131 

net worth 161 

Netflix 35, 59, 161, 205 

network structure 165 

networking 45, 48, 134, 142-43, 156, 
190, 199 

newsletters 139 

newspaper advertising 138 

Nielson, Jakob 117 

Nike 59 

nondisclosure agreements 208 

nonprofit organizations 27, 32-33 

numeracy 14 


offers 147, 157, 160 
ffice hours 12, 13, 44, 52, 173 
office politics 12 
ine selling 34, 68-69 
advertising 139 
e-payment systems 72-73 
reviews 146, 147 
search engine optimization (SEO) 69, 
114, 116, 118, 199 
open days 137 
open-source software 187 
operations 103, 105, 155, 164 
operations manual 183 
opportunities 12, 16, 17, 36, 155 
options, considering your 12 
orders, fulfilling 66, 74-75 
organic marketing 134 
Otto 34 
outsourcing tasks 50-51, 122 
overheads 45, 155, 158 
owners’ council 55 


[e) 


[e) 
1 


packaging 51, 61, 77, 101, 102 
paid search advertising 139 
parenthood, juggling 53 
partnerships 59, 150 
collaborating with partners 199 
expanding your business 193 
identifying 156 
informal 26 
tax and 90, 91 
passing trade 47 
passion 70 
patents 96, 97, 206, 207 
pay-per-click display advertising 139 
payments 71, 72-73 
PayPal 73, 115 
payrolls, outsourcing 51 
peer investments 84 
Penney, James Cash 193 
performance: analyzing 154-55 
appraisals 176-77 
improving 182-83 
reviewing progress 205 
permits 77, 95 
personal characteristics 14 
personal protection 99 
personalized services 130 
Peter the Great 90 
Peters, Tom 168 
phishing 121 
photographs, protecting IP 96 
pitching for investment 86-87, 104, 
197 
place 64, 65 
politics, office 12 
pollution 100, 101 
pop-up events/facilities 47, 132, 137 
Porter, Donald 109 
POS (point-of-sale) system 73 
postage 75 
premises see workspaces 
pressure 175, 185 
prices 23, 64, 66, 105 
problem-solving 15 


processes, streamlining 178-79, 182, 


183 
producers, using local 48 
production, management of 164 
productivity 112, 130, 172 
products: consumer rights 108-109 


HOW TO START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 


design 64 
developing new 37, 157, 195 
diversification 195, 202, 203 
expanding your business 192 
franchise 30 
fulfilling orders 19, 74-75 
importing 49 
key performance indicators (KPIs) 
155 
marketing 64-65, 105 
product-based businesses 18-19 
product liability insurance 94, 109 
promoting 130 
sales channels 66 
scalability of 19 
selling process 66-67 
sourcing supplies and components 
48-49 
supply chains 180-81 
testing 132-33 
USPs 23, 196 
professional liability insurance 95 
profits 81, 90 
cooperatives 32 
forecasting 105, 159 
gross profit 91, 105, 155 
net profit 91, 105, 155 
profit and loss statement 89, 158, 159 
profit margins 155 
nonprofit organizations 27, 32 
selling your business 209 
promotions 64, 65, 105, 130, 135, 136, 
137, 146-47, 198 
protection: protecting your business 
94-95 
safety 98-99 
PSP (payment services provider) 73 
psychographic factors 40, 41 
public liability insurance 95 
public relations (PR) 33 
publicity 136, 137 
purpose, defining your 24 
quality 19, 23, 108, 149, 182 


race 128, 129 
radio stations 138 
ransomware 121 
rates, business 91 


, 220/221 


Index 


razor blade model 35 
reconditioned items 76 
recordkeeping 158-59, 193 
recruitment agencies 51, 123 
recycling 101 
referrals 69, 122, 123, 146-47, 157, 199 
refunds, no-quibble 71 
registered designs 96, 97 
regulations 19, 51 
reliability, providing 149 
renewal options 47 
rent 47, 158 
repairs, consumer rights 109 
reports, financial 89 
repurposed items 48 
reputation 30, 123 
research: bringing customers to life 41 
franchises 30, 31 
into gaps in the market 20-21 
investors 86 
market research 42, 153 
where to locate your start-up 46-47 
responsibility 102-103, 164 
retail 34 
retained earnings 81 
returns: consumer rights 109 
return on investment (ROI) 139 
reused items 48 
revenue 90 
reviews, online 146, 147 
rewards 149 
employee 169, 171, 172 
reward programs 71, 83, 130, 135, 
199, 200 
Riani, Abdo 35 
rights, consumer 108-109 
risk: growth strategies 195 
protecting your business 94-95 
risk assessing 94, 173 
taking 12, 15 
Robinson, Janet L. 146 
royalties 30, 207 
running costs 80 


safety 98-99, 112, 113 
salaries 80, 126 
sales 89 

analyzing sales data 153 


direct sales 34 
effectiveness of marketing 152-53 
fulfilling orders 66, 74-75 
increasing 190-91 
key performance indicators (KPIs) 
154 
management of 165 
marketing mix and 64-65 
mastering 157 
online selling 68-69 
running sales teams 170-71 
sales taxes 91 
selling process 66-67 
tracking 153 
writing business plans 105 
samples, free 135 
“Sand Cone” model 182-83 
scalability 17, 19 
schedules 53 
Schumacher, Michael 155 
search engine optimization (SEO) 69, 
114, 116, 118, 199 
seasonal work 47, 122 
security 47, 76, 83, 186 
segmenting the market 40, 41 
self-employment 26 
self-storage 45 
selling: online selling 68-69 
selling process 66-67 
selling your business 208-209 
see also sales 
sense of purpose 17 
service-based businesses 18-19 
business-to-consumer (B2C) sales 38 
competing on customer service 37 
consumer rights 109 
creating USPs 23, 196 
developing new 157 
how to create successful 70-71 
marketing 64-65, 105 
promoting 130 
scalability of 19 
service agreements 76 
shared spaces 44, 45 
shareholders 55, 81, 90 
shares 84, 90 
shipping 49, 51, 75, 77 
Shopify 69 
shows 137 
sickness 12, 13, 155 
side hustles 18, 15 
Sinek, Simon 24 


skills 14, 15, 164 
Sky TV 35 
Skype 58, 142 
SLA (service level agreement) 50 
SMART goals 166-67 
Snapchat 140 
social enterprises 27, 32, 33 
social entrepreneurs 33 
social media 15, 59, 105, 119, 148, 190, 
199 
action plans 107 
advertising 139, 141 
brand stories and 63 
CRM systems 130 
crowdfunding 82, 83 
customers’ behavior 41 
forming alliances 151 
incentives for sharing 136 
influencers 41, 63, 135, 136, 139, 141, 
142, 198, 199 
key performance indicators (KPIs) 
154 
making the most of 140-41 
marketing 115, 198 
outsourcing 50 
prelaunch checks 133 
promoting awareness 67 
targeting 135 
visibility on 118, 119 
software 76 
accounting 88 
customer relationship management 
(CRM) 130-31 
cybersecurity 120-21 
data management platforms 119 
investing in 186 
open-source software 187 
Solarkiosk AG 103 
sole entities, tax and 90 
sole proprietors 26, 58, 59, 90, 91 
speed, improving performance 182 
staff see employees 
Stagekings 203 
standards, ethical 49 
standing out from the crowd 17, 22-23 
start-ups: choosing a business model 
34-35 
choosing where to locate your 46-47 
costs 30, 76-9, 80 
side hustles 13, 15 
stationery 77, 159 
step change 182 


stepping back 211 
stock see supplies 
Stone, Biz 85 
storage 18, 45, 77, 113 
stories, telling your 62-63, 136 
straplines 61 
strategies 106, 107 
creating 36-37 
diversity 128 
growth 190, 194-95 
testing 132-33 
strengths, identifying 14, 16, 17, 36, 155 
stress 52, 112, 173, 174, 175 
structure, choosing a 26-27 
sublicensee 207 
subscription business models 35 
success 152, 156, 190-91 
succession planning 55, 210-11 
suppliers 23 
code of conduct 103 
local 48, 100 
managing cash flow 161 
sourcing 48-49, 151 
supplies 77, 89 
business assets 78 
capital gains tax (CGT) 90 
discounting 160 
limiting 161 
replenishing 18 
running out of 19 
stock and contents insurance 95 
supply chains 180-81, 200 
vertical diversification 203 
support 149, 187 
surplus 161 
surveys 147 
sustainability 100-101 
switching off 13 
SWOT analysis 36, 104, 155 


talent, retaining 168-69 
targets, setting 171, 201 
tasks, outsourcing 50-51, 122 
Tata, Ratan 55 
tax 80 
charities and 33 
corporation tax 59 
expenses 79 


and importing goods 49 
leasing contracts 76 
sustainability and 100 
understanding business tax 90-91 

eams: managing 166-67, 170-71 
structure 165 

echnology 36, 77, 186-87 

elevision advertising 138 

emperature 113, 173 

erms, offering flexible 37 

erritories 207 

Tesla 161 

estimonials 67 

Thomas, Ken 174 

TikTok 59 

ime: time management 15 
time frames 107, 133 

otals, balanced 89 

ouchpoints 130 

oxicity 98 

rade magazines 16 

rade secrets 96, 97, 207 

rade shows 48 

rademarks 58, 59, 61, 96 

raining 18, 19, 168, 169, 170 

raits, personal 15 

ransferable skills 14, 15 

ransparency 200 

rends 16, 105, 131, 141, 157, 191 

rust 70, 71, 142, 171 

urnover 81, 90, 91 

Twitter 58, 85, 140, 200 


y 


Uber 161 

unconscious bias 129 

unique selling points (USPs) 23, 
105, 196 

upselling 201 

utilities 77, 79, 159 


vacation pay 12, 13 
value, understanding 22, 36, 178-79 
value-added tax (VAT) 91 
values, brand 24, 25, 60, 66, 
162-63, 166 


HOW TO START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 


variable costs 158, 159 
Vaynerchuk, Gary 197 
vehicles 76, 77, 78, 101 
ventilation 113 

venture capitalists 85, 197 
vertical alliances 151 
vertical diversification 203 
video calling apps 187 
vintage items 48 

virtual workspaces 45 
visibility, boosting your 118-19, 198 
vision 24, 25 

vulnerable people 99 


wages 79, 80-81, 158, 159 
Walton, Sam 21, 131 
warehousing 45, 50, 51, 75 
waste, reducing 100 


weaknesses in your business 14, 15, 16, 


36, 155 
websites: affiliate businesses 35, 115 

attracting traffic and improving 
visibility 118-19 

content 114, 115, 116-17, 119, 135, 
147 

content management system (CMS) 
116-17 

customer relationship management 
(CRM) software 130 

data protection 120-21 

designing and building 76, 78, 79, 
116-17 

domain names 76, 114-15, 140 

finding employees 123 

key performance indicators (KPIs) 
154 

live chats 147 

mapping your site’s structure 114-15 

monitoring activity 147 

online selling 68-69 

outsourcing design and maintenance 
50, 79 

planning 114-15 

prelaunch checklist 132, 133 

promoting 199 

search engine optimization (SEO) 69 
114, 116, 118, 199 

social media and your 141 

types of 115 


x 224/223 


Index 


WeChat 59 
weekends 53 
well-being 112, 172-73 
white-label platform 73 
wholesalers 34 
Winfrey, Oprah 103 
withdrawal, stress and 173 
Wix 69 
Wordpress 117 
work-life balance 52-53, 195 
workspaces and workplaces: code of 
conduct 102 
establishing healthy 172-73 
leasing contracts 76 
setting up 44, 79, 112-13 
staying safe in 98-99 
where to locate 44-47 
working from home 44, 46, 52 


Yahoo 69 
YouTube 140 


Zomato 194 
Zoom 142 


Acknowledgments 


Dorling Kindersley would like to thank Fiona Plowman for 
proofreading; Vanessa Bird for the index; and Emma Kennett, 
James McAllister, Sally Newall, and Helen Poultney for 
technical consultancy; Magda Pecsenye for consulting on 

US edition; DTP Designer, Rakesh Kumar; Jackets Editorial 
Coordinator, Priyanka Sharma; and Managing Jackets 

Editor, Saloni Singh. 


Credits 


p. 61 Developing your brand, The Strategic Brand 
Management, Jean-Noél Kapferer 1996; pp64-65 
Marketing mix and 4Ps, Basic Marketing: A Managerial 
Approach, E. Jerome McCarthy, 1960; 4Cs, “New Marketing 
Litany: 4Ps Passé C-Words Take Over”, B. Lauternborn, 1990; 
pp66-67 Sales funnel, Financial Advertising, Elias St 
Elmo Lewis, 1907; p.155 SWOT analysis, Business Policy, 
Text and Cases, Edmund P. Learned, C. Roland Christiansen, 
Kenneth Andrews, and William D. Guth, 1969; pp.174-175 
TKI conflict model, Thomas-Kilmann Instrument Conflict 
Model, Ken Thomas and Ralph Kilmann, 1974, pp.166-167 
SMART goals, “There’s a S.M.A.R.T. Way to Write 
Management's Goals and Objectives”, George T. Doran, 1981; 
pp.182-183 The Sand cone model, “Lasting Improvements 
in Manufacturing Performance: In Search of a New Theory”, 
Ferdows, K. & De Meyer, A, 1990; pp.194-195 The Ansoff 
Matrix, Strategies for Diversification, Igor Ansoff, 1957 


Disclaimer 


The information in this book has been compiled by way of general 
guidance in relation to the specific subjects addressed, but is not 

a substitute, and not to be relied on for legal, accounting, tax, or 
other professional advice on specific circumstances and in specific 
locations. So far as the authors are aware, the information given 

is correct at the time of going to press in 2020. Practice, laws, and 
regulations all change, and the reader should obtain up-to-date 
professional advice on any such issues. The authors and publishers 
disclaim, as far as the law allows, any liability arising directly or 
indirectly from the use, or misuse, of the information contained 

in this book. 


Phillips & Leigh, Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys, have reviewed 
the IP sections of this book for accuracy, but readers should not 
take these sections as constituting legal advice 


The author and publishers welcome any comments, corrections 
or other suggestions for subsequent editions of this work. 
