 

A legal entity is an entity that has legal personality, giving it legal rights and obligations including allowing it to enter into contracts, own property, and to sue and be sued. A legal entity may be created in order to engage in business activities, charitable work, or other activities. Most often, legal entities in business are formed to sell a product or a service. There are many types of legal entities defined in the legal systems of various countries. These may include corporations, cooperatives, charities, partnerships, sole traders and limited liability companies, although not all of these may be legal entities in all jurisdictions. The specific rules vary by country and by state or province. Some of these types are listed below, by country.

Common-law jurisdictions

United Kingdom

There are a number of forms of legal entity in the United Kingdom, including some types of business partnership, companies incorporated under the Companies Acts, mutual societies, some types of charitable organisation, and others including chartered corporations and statutory corporations.

Partnerships (other forms of partnership exist that are not legal entities):

Companies – corporations incorporated under the Companies Act 2006 (or previous companies acts):

Mutual societies:

Charities:

Other forms:

Classifications:

Australia

Australian companies are generally either proprietary or public. Under the Corporations Act 2001, proprietary companies commonly use the suffix Pty Ltd.

Canada

Companies in Canada can be incorporated at the federal or provincial level under the Canada Business Corporations Act or equivalent provincial statutes.

The word or expression "Limited", Limitée, "Incorporated", Incorporée, "Corporation" or Société par actions de régime fédéral or the corresponding abbreviation "Ltd.", Ltée, "Inc.", "Corp." or S.A.R.F. forms part of the name of every entity incorporated under the Canada Business Corporations Act (R.S., 1985, c. C-44). ≈ Ltd. or Plc (UK)

As an exception, entities registered prior to 1985 may continue to be designated Société commerciale canadienne or by the abbreviation S.C.C.

Under the Canada Cooperatives Act (1998, c. 1), a co-operative must have the word "cooperative", "co-operative", "coop", "co-op", coopérative, "united" or "pool", or another grammatical form of any of those words, as part of its name.

Unlike in many other Western countries, Canadian businesses generally only have one form of incorporation available. Unlimited liability corporations can be formed in Alberta "AULC", British Columbia "BCULC" and Nova Scotia "NSULC". The aforementioned unlimited liability corporations are generally not used as operating business structures, but are instead used to create favorable tax positions for either Americans investing in Canada or vice versa. For U.S. tax purposes the ULC is classified as a disregarded entity.

Rather, Canadian businesses are generally formed under one of the following structures:

Hong Kong

India

In India, the Companies Act 2013 provides for public and private companies and introduced the one person company as a single-member private company; naming conventions include "Limited" for public companies and "Private Limited".

Malaysia

New Zealand

In New Zealand, under the Companies Act 1993, the registered name of a limited liability company must end with "Limited" or "Tāpui".

Nigeria

Nigeria's Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020 recognizes private and public companies limited by shares, companies limited by guarantee, and unlimited companies it also enables single-member companies.

Pakistan

Forms of business include:

Singapore

Private Limited Company, Sole Proprietorship and Partnership are the predominant types of business found in Singapore.

United States

In the United States, most legal entities are incorporated under the law of a particular state. The federal government does not generally incorporate entities (and when it does this is normally referred to as "chartering" them), with a few narrow exceptions, either government-sponsored corporations or government-owned corporations.

Laws on what is considered a legal entity differ between states. In particular, older versions of the Uniform Partnership Act, which remain in force in some states, do not consider general partnerships to be legal entities distinct from their partners while newer versions (referred to as the Revised Unified Partnership Act; RUPA) that have been adopted in other states do consider partnerships to be legal entities. However, even when partnerships are considered legal entities with the right to own property and to be sued under RUPA, they continue to be treated as aggregates of their partners for tax and liability purposes.

A company is not necessarily incorporated as a legal entity. For example, a company may be a "corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock company, trust, fund, or organized group of persons, whether incorporated or not, and (in an official capacity) any receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or similar official, or liquidating agent, for any of the foregoing".

Tax classifications

Those entities existing on the state level have two separate identities: their legal entity type, e.g., partnership, corporation, or LLC, and their tax classification, what they are regarded as for federal income tax purposes. A further way to classify an entity is whether it is a for-profit or nonprofit enterprise, each classification with its own taxonomy and implications on federal income tax law. For-profit entities exist for the purpose of producing a profit for their owners whereas nonprofits exist for any purpose other than profit.

For federal tax purposes, the Internal Revenue Service has separate entity classification rules, generally depending on whether an entity is a for-profit or non-profit organization. For-profit entities can be collectively regarded as "taxable organizations" while nonprofit entities are collectively regarded as "tax-exempt organizations" or simply "exempt organizations."

Taxable organizations

Under the Internal Revenue Code, a for-profit entity may be classified as a corporation, a partnership, a cooperative or a disregarded entity. A corporation is taxed as a C corporation unless it elects and meets the requirements to be taxed as an S Corporation. A disregarded entity has one owner (or a married couple as owner) that is not recognized for tax purposes as an entity separate from its owner, so the owner is taxed on the individual level. Types of disregarded entities include single-member LLCs; qualified sub-chapter S subsidiaries and qualified real estate investment trust subsidiaries. A disregarded entity's transparent tax status does not affect its status under state law. For example, for federal tax purposes, a sole-member LLC (SMLLC) is disregarded, so that all its assets and liabilities are treated as owned by its single member. But under state law, an SMLLC can contract in its own name and its owner is generally not personally liable for the debts and obligations of the entity. To be recognized as a cooperative for tax purposes cooperatives must follow certain rules under subchapter T of the Internal Revenue Code.

Tax exempt organizations

Nonprofit organizations on the state level are exempt from federal income taxation for most types of income. There are two main types of tax exempt organizations under the Internal Revenue Code: 501(c) organizations and 527 organizations. Tax exemption has two components: exemption from income taxation and the allowance of a deduction on the tax returns of donors.

Section 501(c) encompasses most types of nonprofit entities other than ones engaged substantially in political activity. There are 29 subtypes of 501(c) organizations. For example, section 501(c)(10) includes "domestic fraternal societies, orders, or associations, operating under the lodge system," while section 501(c)(6) includes "business leagues, chambers of commerce, real-estate boards, boards of trade, or professional football leagues" under certain circumstances. The most prevalent type of 501(c)s are 501(c)(3) organizations, known broadly as "charitable organizations," those whose purpose is charitable (i.e., relief from poverty), educational, scientific, religious, or advocatory, among others, as long as such organization does not engage in substantial political activity or inure the benefit of net earnings to shareholders or other individuals. This is the preferred tax status because it is the only 501(c) that obtains both income tax exemption and tax deductible donations. All other 501(c) types only obtain tax exemption.  Section 501(c)(3)s can be further divided into private foundations, public charities, and private operating foundations with private foundations given the least favorable deductibility rate. State-level unincorporated nonprofit associations, charitable trusts, and nonprofit corporations may fall into any one of the 501(c) categories depending on their purpose and the activities they engage in.

Section 527 organizations, also called "political organizations," are any nonprofit substantially engaged in "political activity," such as election campaigning or lobbying. These are organizations like political parties and election campaign committees, which are often called political action committees (PACs) or super-PACs. These organizations are subject to more stringent regulations than 501(c) organizations and only receive tax exemption; donations to 527s are not deductible. Any type of nonprofit entity existing on the state level will be regarded as a 527 if it substantially engages in political activity.

Federally chartered

Of the few types of companies that may exist under a federally issued charter, the bulk are banks, credit unions, and similar depository institutions. Such institutions are distinguished from state-chartered banks by including a key word in their formal names. For a bank, the key word is "national". A bank chartered by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) must have the word "national" in its name. A bank chartered by a state cannot have "national" in its name.

For a savings bank (formerly called a savings and loan association) or credit union, the key word is "federal", and the same rules apply; a federally chartered savings bank or credit union must have the word "federal" in its name, while a state chartered savings bank or credit union cannot have "federal" in its name.

Many federal governmental units are specially formed public corporations (which, for tax purposes are also generally 501(c)(1) organizations) and government-sponsored enterprises, while some private organizations have received a Congressional charter.

Incorporated nonfederal entities

Partnerships

Limited liability companies

Corporations

For-profit corporations

Nonprofit corporations

Cooperatives

Asia

Azerbaijan

Companies in Azerbaijan are registered and operate in accordance with the Civil Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Law "On State Registration and the State Register of Legal Entities." The registration process is supervised by the Ministry of Economy through the State Tax Service. Both local and foreign individuals or legal entities can establish companies in Azerbaijan, including limited liability companies (LLC), joint-stock companies (JSC), and representative or branch offices.

Brunei

There are three main types of business entity in Brunei, namely sole proprietorship, partnership, and company.

A private company contains the term "Sendirian Berhad", meaning "Private Limited" or "Sdn. Bhd." as part of its name; for a public company "Berhad" or "Bhd." is used.

Cambodia

China

According to the Company Law of the People's Republic of China, companies include limited liability companies and joint-stock limited companies which were founded in mainland China.

Companies include two types,

Other than companies, ordinary firms include other two types: (See also Partnership (China))

Indonesia

Most of the legal entity types are regulated in a modified version of the original version of the Dutch Burgerlijk Wetboek. Business entities (badan usaha) in Indonesia can be grouped into legal entities (Badan hukum) and non-legal entities (Non Badan Hukum), the latter which are not legal person thus cannot sue or be sued.

Legal Entities (Badan Hukum)

Non-Legal Entities (Non Badan Hukum)

Iran

Israel

Japan

Japanese company law recognizes several types of companies, with the most common being the Kabushiki Kaisha, similar to a joint-stock company. Another popular form is the Gōdō Kaisha, which resembles a limited liability company. The Companies Act of 2005 established the legal framework for these and other business entities in Japan, regulating their formation, governance, and operation.

Business corporations are referred to as kaisha (会社) and are formed under the Companies Act of 2005. There are currently (2015) 4 types and each of them has legal personality:

Partnerships are referred to as kumiai (組合). Each of these 4 types has no legal personality though other corporations, which include "kumiai" in their name, have:

Kazakhstan

South Korea

Taiwan (Republic of China)

Thailand

Vietnam

South America

Argentina

Brazil

Brazil's main company forms are the sociedade limitada - governed by the Civil Code and the sociedade anônima -governed by the Corporations Law.

Chile

Colombia

Costa Rica

Dominican Republic

Ecuador

Africa

Egypt

The principal forms for private investment include the joint-stock company and the limited liability company, regulated by Law No.159 of 1981 and related investment legislation.

Ethiopia

Ghana



Kenya

Kenya's Companies Act 2015 provides for private and public companies, including public limited companies. It sets naming and formation rules and consolidates modern company law in Kenya.

South Africa

Under the Companies Act 2008, South Africa provides for non-profit companies and several profit-company forms: private companies, public companies, personal liability companies, and state-owned companies.

Europe

European Union and European Economic Area

Directive 2017/1132 consolidates EU company-law measures on incorporation, capital, disclosure and cross-border aspects for limited-liability companies the EU also recognizes the Societas Europaea.

Albania



Foreign and domestic investors have a range of options to establish and organize their business in Albania. They can either create and register a business organization or establish and register a branch or representative office.

Previously, foreign entity registration was handled through the National Registration Center, which had implemented a streamlined "one-stop-shop" system since September 1, 2007. However, on November 26, 2015, the enactment of Law No. 131/2015 led to the formation of the National Business Center (QKB) which aimed to simplify business procedures by centralizing registration and licensing in a single institution. Consequently, the National Registration Center and the National Licensing Center were abolished.

Austria

See also help.gv.at Archived 2015-12-26 at the Wayback Machine (Austrian government site, in German)

Belarus

Belgium

Dutch, French or German names may be used.

Following changes to the Code of Companies and Associations, the term "Private limited liability company" (BVBA/SPRL) automatically became "Private limited company" (BV/SRL), as a part of harmonising legal entity types within the European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Bulgarian commercial law recognizes several forms of merchants and commercial companies, including sole traders, general partnerships, limited partnerships, limited liability companies, joint-stock companies, and partnerships limited by shares.

Croatia

Types of legal person business entities:

Types of natural person business entities:

Non-profit:

Cyprus

Czech Republic

Denmark

Estonia

Finland

The abbreviations are usually in Finnish, but Swedish names may also be used either as is or in combination with Finnish, e.g. Oy Yritys Ab.

In the corporations of real estate law, the ownership or membership may be vested either in the real property or in a legal or natural person, depending on the corporation type. In many cases, the membership or ownership of such corporation is obligatory for a person or property that fulfils the legal requirements for membership or wishes to engage in certain activities.

France

France's widely used forms include the "société par actions simplifiée", "société à responsabilité limitée" and "société anonyme" government guidance sets out their main features and minimum capital and confirms SAS as the most common commercial form.

Germany

In Germany, the most common corporate forms include the Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung and the Aktiengesellschaft. The GmbH is a private limited liability company, widely used for small and medium-sized enterprises. The AG is a public limited company used by larger firms and those listed on stock exchanges. German corporate law is governed by the Handelsgesetzbuch. Companies must register with the local commercial register and comply with strict disclosure and accounting standards.

Greece

Companies of the type "Anónimi Etaireía" would translate this designation into the French translation société anonyme or S.A. in non-Greek languages.

Hungary

In Hungary, business entities are mainly regulated by the Companies Act of 2006, the Companies Registration Act of 2006 and the new Civil Code of 2013. All companies are required to indicate their type in their name.

Iceland

Ireland

The situation in Ireland is similar to the United Kingdom below, though without the class Community Interest Company. There were two forms of Company Limited by Guarantee, but only the form without a share capital is now used. Irish names may also be used, such as cpt (cuideachta phoibli theoranta) for plc, and Teo (Teoranta) for Ltd.

Italy

Kosovo



Latvia

Liechtenstein

Lithuania

Luxembourg

Malta

Netherlands

All non-governmental legal entities are registered on the companies register by the chamber of commerce.

Norway

Poland

No universal definitions of company and business exist in the Polish law. The usage of the equivalent terms in the Polish legal system may often be confusing because each of them has several different definitions for various purposes.

Przedsiębiorca ('entrepreneur' or 'undertaking')—known as kupiec ('merchant') until 1964; jednostka gospodarcza ('economic unit') from 1964 to 1988; podmiot gospodarczy ('economic entity') from 1988 to 1997—is the closest equivalent of company understood as an entity. As of January 2021, there are at least thirteen different definitions of entrepreneur/undertaking.

Przedsiębiorstwo ('enterprise') is defined in the Civil Code as an organized complex of material and non-material components designated to perform economic activity. Therefore, it is equivalent to company understood as a set of assets organized to do business.

Działalność gospodarcza ('economic activity') is the closest equivalent of business. As of January 2021, there are at least six different definitions of economic activity.

Portugal

Romania

Societăți comerciale, abbreviated SC (Companies):

Russia

In Russia, companies are governed by the Civil Code and federal laws such as the Law on Joint-Stock Companies and the Law on Limited Liability Companies. Common types of corporate entities include the Open Joint-Stock Company, the Closed Joint-Stock Company, and the Limited Liability Company.

According to the Civil Code of Russian Federation the following corporate entities may be created:: Part 1 

Unitary enterprise

Joint-stock companies

Joint-stock companies:: Part 1 

Partnerships

These are less common:

Slovakia

Slovenia

Spain

Sweden

Turkey

According to Code of Obligations (fifth book of Civil Code) (Act No: 6098):

According to the Commercial Code (Act No: 6102):

Ortaklıklar ≈ Partnerships (unlike the partnerships in Anglo-American law, they also have legal personality like companies)

Sermaye şirketleri ≈ Companies

According to the Capital Markets Act (Act No: 6362):

According to the Cooperatives Act (Act No: 1163):

Other entitites:

Ukraine

Company formation is regulated by the Ukrainian Civil Code and Commercial Code, Law On Business Associations, Law On Joint Stock Companies, Law On Limited Liability Companies and Additional Liability Companies.

Mexico

Mexico's General Law of Commercial Companies recognizes, among other forms, the Sociedad Anónima and the Sociedad por Acciones Simplificada, the latter added by 2016 reforms to facilitate single-shareholder startups.

Note: Any of these entities can be incorporated as a "Capital Variable" entity, in which case has to add the "de C.V." sufix to its company name. Example: "S.A. de C.V.", "S. de R.L. de C.V."

Oman

Peru

Philippines

With the exception of homeowners' associations (now regulated by the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development (DHSUD)), the legal existence of all non-government corporate/juridical entities in the Philippines are contingent on the approval and continuance of registration with either the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Cooperative Development Authority. The earlier is for partnerships, corporations / foundations, investment products (such as bonds and preferred shares), while the latter is for cooperatives.

Hybrid legal systems (Islamic)

Saudi Arabia

Saudi Arabia's new Companies Law modernized company forms and introduced the Simplified Joint Stock Company to support startups and VC activity.

United Arab Emirates

The UAE's Federal Decree-Law No. 32 of 2021 governs company types. Since 2021 reforms, onshore "mainland" companies in many sectors may be 100% foreign-owned.

In UAE Free Zones, a Free Zone Establishment (FZE) or Free Zone Company (FZC) is a limited liability company governed by the rules and regulations of the free zone in which it is established.

See also

References

External links

