Ion is a data serialization language developed by Amazon. It may be represented by either a human-readable text form or a compact binary form. The text form is a superset of JSON; thus, any valid JSON document is also a valid Ion document.

Data types
As a superset of JSON, Ion includes the following data types

null: An empty value (for JSON compatibility)
bool: Boolean values
string: Unicode text literals
list: Ordered heterogeneous collection of Ion values (extension of JSON array)
struct: Unordered collection of key/value pairs (extension of JSON object)
The nebulous JSON 'number' type is strictly defined in Ion to be one of

int: Signed integers of arbitrary size
float: 64-bit IEEE binary-encoded floating point numbers
decimal: Decimal-encoded real numbers of arbitrary precision
Ion adds these types:

timestamp: Date/time/time zone moments of arbitrary precision
symbol: Unicode symbolic atoms (a.k.a. identifiers), stored as interned strings in binary format
blob: Binary data of user-defined encoding
clob: Text data of user-defined encoding
sexp: Nested list of values (equivalent to an S-expression) with application-defined semantics
Each Ion type supports a null variant, indicating a lack of value while maintaining a strict type (e.g., null.int, null.struct).
The Ion format permits attaching one or more annotations (i.e. a list of symbols) to any value. Such annotations may be used as metadata for otherwise opaque data (such as a blob).

Implementations
Amazon supported library implementations
C#
Go Lang
Python
JS

Examples

Sample document
Features seen in JavaScript and JSON5:

Features unique to Ion:

Uses
Amazon's Quantum Ledger Database (QLDB) stores data in Ion documents.
PartiQL, an open source SQL-based query language also by Amazon, is built upon Ion. PartiQL supported queries are used by QLDB, S3Select.

Tooling and extensions
Ion Path Extractor API aims to combine the convenience of a DOM API with the speed of a streaming API.
IDE support
Eclipse
IntelliJ
Jackson data format module for Ion
Apache Hive SerDe for Ion
Ion Schema
Specification
Implementations
Ion Hash defines an algorithm for constructing a hash for any Ion value, given a user-provided hash function capable of taking binary data of arbitrary length.
Specification
Implementations
