Introduction
Here are some formal deﬁnitions of terms used throughout this book:
Control System
A Control System is a device, or a collection of devices that manage the behavior of
other devices. Some devices are not controllable. A control system is an interconnection
of components connected or related in such a manner as to command, direct, or regulate
itself or another system.
Control System is a conceptual framework for designing systems with capabilities of regulation and/or tracking to give a desired performance. For this
there must be a set of signals measurable to know the performance, another
set of signals measurable to inﬂuence the evolution of the system in time and
a third set which is not measurable but disturb the evolution.
Controller
A controller is a control system that manages the behavior of another device or system.
Compensator
A Compensator is a control system that regulates another system, usually by conditioning the input or the output to that system. Compensators are typically employed
to correct a single design ﬂaw, with the intention of aﬀecting other aspects of the design
in a minimal manner.
There are essentially two methods to approach the problem of designing a new control
system: the Classical Approach, and the Modern Approach.

2.3 Classical and Modern
Classical and Modern control methodologies are named in a misleading way, because the
group of techniques called ”Classical” were actually developed later than the techniques
labeled ”Modern”. However, in terms of developing control systems, Modern methods have
been used to great eﬀect more recently, while the Classical methods have been gradually
falling out of favor. Most recently, it has been shown that Classical and Modern methods
can be combined to highlight their respective strengths and weaknesses.
Classical Methods, which this book will consider ﬁrst, are methods involving the Laplace
Transform domain. Physical systems are modeled in the so-called ”time domain”, where
the response of a given system is a function of the various inputs, the previous system values,
and time. As time progresses, the state of the system and its response change. However,
time-domain models for systems are frequently modeled using high-order diﬀerential equations which can become impossibly diﬃcult for humans to solve and some of which can
even become impossible for modern computer systems to solve eﬃciently. To counteract this problem, integral transforms, such as the Laplace Transform and the Fourier
Transform, can be employed to change an Ordinary Diﬀerential Equation (ODE) in the
time domain into a regular algebraic polynomial in the transform domain. Once a given
system has been converted into the transform domain it can be manipulated with greater
ease and analyzed quickly by humans and computers alike.

6

Who is This Book For?
Modern Control Methods, instead of changing domains to avoid the complexities of timedomain ODE mathematics, converts the diﬀerential equations into a system of lower-order
time domain equations called State Equations, which can then be manipulated using
techniques from linear algebra. This book will consider Modern Methods second.
A third distinction that is frequently made in the realm of control systems is to divide analog
methods (classical and modern, described above) from digital methods. Digital Control
Methods were designed to try and incorporate the emerging power of computer systems
into previous control methodologies. A special transform, known as the Z-Transform,
was developed that can adequately describe digital systems, but at the same time can be
converted (with some eﬀort) into the Laplace domain. Once in the Laplace domain, the
digital system can be manipulated and analyzed in a very similar manner to Classical analog
systems. For this reason, this book will not make a hard and fast distinction between Analog
and Digital systems, and instead will attempt to study both paradigms in parallel.

2.4 Who is This Book For?
This book is intended to accompany a course of study in under-graduate and graduate
engineering. As has been mentioned previously, this book is not focused on any particular
discipline within engineering, however any person who wants to make use of this material
should have some basic background in the Laplace transform (if not other transforms),
calculus, etc. The material in this book may be used to accompany several semesters of
study, depending on the program of your particular college or university. The study of
control systems is generally a topic that is reserved for students in their 3rd or 4th year of
a 4 year undergraduate program, because it requires so much previous information. Some
of the more advanced topics may not be covered until later in a graduate program.
Many colleges and universities only oﬀer one or two classes speciﬁcally about control systems
at the undergraduate level. Some universities, however, do oﬀer more than that, depending
on how the material is broken up, and how much depth that is to be covered. Also, many
institutions will oﬀer a handful of graduate-level courses on the subject. This book will
attempt to cover the topic of control systems from both a graduate and undergraduate
level, with the advanced topics built on the basic topics in a way that is intuitive. As such,
students should be able to begin reading this book in any place that seems an appropriate
starting point, and should be able to ﬁnish reading where further information is no longer
needed.

2.5 What are the Prerequisites?
Understanding of the material in this book will require a solid mathematical foundation.
This book does not currently explain, nor will it ever try to fully explain most of the
necessary mathematical tools used in this text. For that reason, the reader is expected to
have read the following wikibooks, or have background knowledge comparable to them:

7

Introduction
Algebra3
Calculus4
The reader should have a good understanding of diﬀerentiation and integration. Partial
diﬀerentiation, multiple integration, and functions of multiple variables will be used occasionally, but the students are not necessarily required to know those subjects well. These
advanced calculus topics could better be treated as a co-requisite instead of a pre-requisite.
Linear Algebra5
State-space system representation draws heavily on linear algebra techniques. Students
should know how to operate on matrices. Students should understand basic matrix operations (addition, multiplication, determinant, inverse, transpose). Students would also
beneﬁt from a prior understanding of Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, but those subjects are
covered in this text.
Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations6
All linear systems can be described by a linear ordinary diﬀerential equation. It is beneﬁcial, therefore, for students to understand these equations. Much of this book describes
methods to analyze these equations. Students should know what a diﬀerential equation
is, and they should also know how to ﬁnd the general solutions of ﬁrst and second order
ODEs.
Engineering Analysis7
This book reinforces many of the advanced mathematical concepts used in the Engineering
Analysis8 book, and we will refer to the relevant sections in the aforementioned text for
further information on some subjects. This is essentially a math book, but with a focus
on various engineering applications. It relies on a previous knowledge of the other math
books in this list.
Signals and Systems9
The Signals and Systems10 book will provide a basis in the ﬁeld of systems theory, of
which control systems is a subset. Readers who have not read the Signals and Systems11
book will be at a severe disadvantage when reading this book.

2.6 How is this Book Organized?
This book will be organized following a particular progression. First this book will discuss
the basics of system theory, and it will oﬀer a brief refresher on integral transforms. Section
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

8

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Algebra
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Calculus
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Linear%20Algebra
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ordinary%20Differential%20Equations
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals%20and%20Systems
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals%20and%20Systems
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals%20and%20Systems

Diﬀerential Equations Review
2 will contain a brief primer on digital information, for students who are not necessarily
familiar with them. This is done so that digital and analog signals can be considered in
parallel throughout the rest of the book. Next, this book will introduce the state-space
method of system description and control. After section 3, topics in the book will use
state-space and transform methods interchangeably (and occasionally simultaneously). It is
important, therefore, that these three chapters be well read and understood before venturing
into the later parts of the book.
After the ”basic” sections of the book, we will delve into speciﬁc methods of analyzing and
designing control systems. First we will discuss Laplace-domain stability analysis techniques
(Routh-Hurwitz, root-locus), and then frequency methods (Nyquist Criteria, Bode Plots).
After the classical methods are discussed, this book will then discuss Modern methods of
stability analysis. Finally, a number of advanced topics will be touched upon, depending
on the knowledge level of the various contributors.
As the subject matter of this book expands, so too will the prerequisites. For instance,
when this book is expanded to cover nonlinear systems, a basic background knowledge
of nonlinear mathematics will be required.

2.6.1 Versions
This wikibook has been expanded to include multiple versions12 of its text, diﬀerentiated
by the material covered, and the order in which the material is presented. Each diﬀerent
version is composed of the chapters of this book, included in a diﬀerent order. This book
covers a wide range of information, so if you don't need all the information that this book
has to oﬀer, perhaps one of the other versions would be right for you and your educational
needs.
Each separate version has a table of contents outlining the diﬀerent chapters that are included in that version. Also, each separate version comes complete with a printable version,
and some even come with PDF versions as well.
Take a look at the All Versions Listing Page13 to ﬁnd the version of the book that is
right for you and your needs.

2.7 Diﬀerential Equations Review
Implicit in the study of control systems is the underlying use of diﬀerential equations. Even
if they aren't visible on the surface, all of the continuous-time systems that we will be
looking at are described in the time domain by ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODE), some
of which are relatively high-order.

12
13

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FAll%20Versions
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FAll%20Versions

9

Introduction

Let's review some diﬀerential equation basics. Consider the topic of interest from a bank.
The amount of interest accrued on a given principal balance (the amount of money you
put into the bank) P, is given by:
dP
dt = rP

Where dP
dt is the interest (rate of change of the principal), and r is the interest rate.
Notice in this case that P is a function of time (t), and can be rewritten to reﬂect that:
dP (t)
dt = rP (t)

To solve this basic, ﬁrst-order equation, we can use a technique called ”separation of
variables”, where we move all instances of the letter P to one side, and all instances of
t to the other:
dP (t)
P (t) = r dt

And integrating both sides gives us:
ln |P (t)| = rt + C
This is all ﬁne and good, but generally, we like to get rid of the logarithm, by raising
both sides to a power of e:
P (t) = ert+C
Where we can separate out the constant as such:
D = eC
P (t) = Dert
D is a constant that represents the initial conditions of the system, in this case the
starting principal.
Diﬀerential equations are particularly diﬃcult to manipulate, especially once we get to
higher-orders of equations. Luckily, several methods of abstraction have been created that
allow us to work with ODEs, but at the same time, not have to worry about the complexities of them. The classical method, as described above, uses the Laplace, Fourier, and Z
Transforms to convert ODEs in the time domain into polynomials in a complex domain.
These complex polynomials are signiﬁcantly easier to solve than the ODE counterparts. The
Modern method instead breaks diﬀerential equations into systems of low-order equations,
and expresses this system in terms of matrices. It is a common precept in ODE theory that
an ODE of order N can be broken down into N equations of order 1.
Readers who are unfamiliar with diﬀerential equations might be able to read and understand
the material in this book reasonably well. However, all readers are encouraged to read the
related sections in Calculus14 .

14

10

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Calculus

History

2.8 History
The ﬁeld of control systems started essentially in the ancient world. Early civilizations,
notably the Greeks and the Arabs were heavily preoccupied with the accurate measurement
of time, the result of which were several ”water clocks” that were designed and implemented.
However, there was very little in the way of actual progress made in the ﬁeld of engineering
until the beginning of the renaissance in Europe. Leonhard Euler (for whom Euler's
Formula is named) discovered a powerful integral transform, but Pierre-Simon Laplace
used the transform (later called the Laplace Transform) to solve complex problems in
probability theory.
Joseph Fourier was a court mathematician in France under Napoleon I. He created a special function decomposition called the Fourier Series, that was later generalized into an
integral transform, and named in his honor (the Fourier Transform).

Figure 1
Pierre-Simon Laplace
1749-1827

Figure 2
Joseph Fourier
1768-1840

The ”golden age” of control engineering occurred between 1910-1945, where mass communication methods were being created and two world wars were being fought. During this
period, some of the most famous names in controls engineering were doing their work:
Nyquist and Bode.
Hendrik Wade Bode and Harry Nyquist, especially in the 1930's while working with
Bell Laboratories, created the bulk of what we now call ”Classical Control Methods”. These
methods were based oﬀ the results of the Laplace and Fourier Transforms, which had been
previously known, but were made popular by Oliver Heaviside around the turn of the
century. Previous to Heaviside, the transforms were not widely used, nor respected mathematical tools.

11

Introduction
Bode is credited with the ”discovery” of the closed-loop feedback system, and the logarithmic
plotting technique that still bears his name (bode plots). Harry Nyquist did extensive
research in the ﬁeld of system stability and information theory. He created a powerful
stability criteria that has been named for him (The Nyquist Criteria).
Modern control methods were introduced in the early 1950's, as a way to bypass some
of the shortcomings of the classical methods. Rudolf Kalman is famous for his work in
modern control theory, and an adaptive controller called the Kalman Filter was named
in his honor. Modern control methods became increasingly popular after 1957 with the
invention of the computer, and the start of the space program. Computers created the
need for digital control methodologies, and the space program required the creation of some
”advanced” control techniques, such as ”optimal control”, ”robust control”, and ”nonlinear
control”. These last subjects, and several more, are still active areas of study among research
engineers.

2.9 Branches of Control Engineering
Here we are going to give a brief listing of the various diﬀerent methodologies within
the sphere of control engineering. Oftentimes, the lines between these methodologies are
blurred, or even erased completely.
Classical Controls
Control methodologies where the ODEs that describe a system are transformed using the
Laplace, Fourier, or Z Transforms, and manipulated in the transform domain.
Modern Controls
Methods where high-order diﬀerential equations are broken into a system of ﬁrst-order
equations. The input, output, and internal states of the system are described by vectors
called ”state variables”.
Robust Control
Control methodologies where arbitrary outside noise/disturbances are accounted for, as
well as internal inaccuracies caused by the heat of the system itself, and the environment.
Optimal Control
In a system, performance metrics are identiﬁed, and arranged into a ”cost function”. The
cost function is minimized to create an operational system with the lowest cost.
Adaptive Control
In adaptive control, the control changes its response characteristics over time to better
control the system.
Nonlinear Control

12

MATLAB
The youngest branch of control engineering, nonlinear control encompasses systems that
cannot be described by linear equations or ODEs, and for which there is often very little
supporting theory available.
Game Theory
Game Theory is a close relative of control theory, and especially robust control and optimal
control theories. In game theory, the external disturbances are not considered to be random
noise processes, but instead are considered to be ”opponents”. Each player has a cost
function that they attempt to minimize, and that their opponents attempt to maximize.
This book will deﬁnitely cover the ﬁrst two branches, and will hopefully be expanded to
cover some of the later branches, if time allows.

2.10 MATLAB
Information about using MATLAB for control systems can be found in
the Appendixa
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FMATLAB

MATLAB ® is a programming tool that is commonly used in the ﬁeld of control engineering. We will discuss MATLAB in speciﬁc sections of this book devoted to that purpose.
MATLAB will not appear in discussions outside these speciﬁc sections, although MATLAB
may be used in some example problems. An overview of the use of MATLAB in control
engineering can be found in the appendix at: Control Systems/MATLAB15 .
For more information on MATLAB in general, see: MATLAB Programming16 .
For more information about properly referencing MATLAB, see:
Resourcesa
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FResources

Nearly all textbooks on the subject of control systems, linear systems, and system analysis
will use MATLAB as an integral part of the text. Students who are learning this subject
at an accredited university will certainly have seen this material in their textbooks, and are
likely to have had MATLAB work as part of their classes. It is from this perspective that
the MATLAB appendix is written.
In the future, this book may be expanded to include information on Simulink ®, as well
as MATLAB.
There are a number of other software tools that are useful in the analysis and design
of control systems. Additional information can be added in the appendix of this book,
depending on the experience and prior knowledge of contributors.

15
16

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FMATLAB
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB%20Programming

13

Introduction

2.11 About Formatting
This book will use some simple conventions throughout.

2.11.1 Mathematical Conventions
Mathematical equations will be labeled with the {{eqn}} template, to give them names.
Equations that are labeled in such a manner are important, and should be taken special
note of. For instance, notice the label to the right of this equation:
[Inverse Laplace Transform]
f (t) = L−1 {F (s)} =

1
2πi

∫ c+i∞

est F (s) ds

c−i∞

Equations that are named in this manner will also be copied into the List of Equations
Glossary17 in the end of the book, for an easy reference.
Italics will be used for English variables, functions, and equations that appear in the main
text. For example e, j, f(t) and X(s) are all italicized. Wikibooks contains a LaTeX mathematics formatting engine, although an attempt will be made not to employ formatted
mathematical equations inline with other text because of the diﬀerence in size and font.
Greek letters, and other non-English characters will not be italicized in the text unless
they appear in the midst of multiple variables which are italicized (as a convenience to the
editor).
Scalar time-domain functions and variables will be denoted with lower-case letters, along
with a t in parenthesis, such as: x(t), y(t), and h(t). Discrete-time functions will be written
in a similar manner, except with an [n] instead of a (t).
Fourier, Laplace, Z, and Star transformed functions will be denoted with capital letters
followed by the appropriate variable in parenthesis. For example: F(s), X(jω), Y(z), and
F*(s).
Matrices will be denoted with capital letters. Matrices which are functions of time will be
denoted with a capital letter followed by a t in parenthesis. For example: A(t) is a matrix,
a(t) is a scalar function of time.
Transforms of time-variant matrices will be displayed in uppercase bold letters, such as
H(s).
Math equations rendered using LaTeX will appear on separate lines, and will be indented
from the rest of the text.

17

14

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FList%20of%20Equations

About Formatting

2.11.2 Text Conventions
Information which is tangent or auxiliary to the main text will be placed in these ”sidebox” templates.
Examples will appear in TextBox templates, which show up as large grey boxes ﬁlled
with text and equations.
Important Deﬁnitions
Will appear in TextBox templates as well, except we will use this formatting to show
that it is a deﬁnition.

Notes of interest will appear in ”infobox” templates. These notes will often be used to
explain some nuances of a mathematical derivation or proof.

B

Warning

Warnings will appear in these ”warning” boxes. These boxes will point out common
mistakes, or other items to be careful of.

15

3 System Identiﬁcation
3.1 Systems
Systems, in one sense, are devices that take input and produce an output. A system can be
thought to operate on the input to produce the output. The output is related to the input
by a certain relationship known as the system response. The system response usually
can be modeled with a mathematical relationship between the system input and the system
output.

3.2 System Properties
Physical systems can be divided up into a number of diﬀerent categories, depending on
particular properties that the system exhibits. Some of these system classiﬁcations are very
easy to work with and have a large theory base for analysis. Some system classiﬁcations are
very complex and have still not been investigated with any degree of success. By properly
identifying the properties of a system, certain analysis and design tools can be selected for
use with the system.
The early sections of this book will focus primarily on linear time-invariant (LTI) systems. LTI systems are the easiest class of system to work with, and have a number of
properties that make them ideal to study. This chapter discusses some properties of systems.
Later chapters in this book will look at time variant systems and nonlinear systems. Both
time variant and nonlinear systems are very complex areas of current research, and both
can be diﬃcult to analyze properly. Unfortunately, most physical real-world systems are
time-variant, nonlinear, or both.
An introduction to system identiﬁcation and least squares techniques can be found here1 .
An introduction to parameter identiﬁcation techniques can be found here2 .

3.3 Initial Time
The initial time of a system is the time before which there is no input. Typically, the initial
time of a system is deﬁned to be zero, which will simplify the analysis signiﬁcantly. Some

1
2

http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Introduction_to_System_
Identification
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Introduction_to_Parameter_
Identification

17

System Identiﬁcation
techniques, such as the Laplace Transform require that the initial time of the system be
zero. The initial time of a system is typically denoted by t0 .
The value of any variable at the initial time t0 will be denoted with a 0 subscript. For
instance, the value of variable x at time t0 is given by:
x(t0 ) = x0
Likewise, any time t with a positive subscript are points in time after t0 , in ascending order:
t0 ≤ t1 ≤ t2 ≤ · · · ≤ tn
So t1 occurs after t0 , and t2 occurs after both points. In a similar fashion above, a variable
with a positive subscript (unless specifying an index into a vector) also occurs at that point
in time:
x(t1 ) = x1

x(t2 ) = x2
This is valid for all points in time t.

3.4 Additivity
A system satisﬁes the property of additivity if a sum of inputs results in a sum of outputs.
By deﬁnition: an input of x3 (t) = x1 (t) + x2 (t) results in an output of y3 (t) = y1 (t) + y2 (t).
To determine whether a system is additive, use the following test:
Given a system f that takes an input x and outputs a value y, assume two inputs (x1 and
x2 ) produce two outputs:
y1 = f (x1 )

y2 = f (x2 )
Now, create a composite input that is the sum of the previous inputs:
x3 = x1 + x2
Then the system is additive if the following equation is true:
y3 = f (x3 ) = f (x1 + x2 ) = f (x1 ) + f (x2 ) = y1 + y2

18

Homogeneity
Systems that satisfy this property are called additive. Additive systems are useful because
a sum of simple inputs can be used to analyze the system response to a more complex input.

3.4.1 Example: Sinusoids
Given the following equation:
y(t) = sin(3x(t))
Create a sum of inputs as:
x(t) = x1 (t) + x2 (t)
and construct the expected sum of outputs:
y(t) = y1 (t) + y2 (t)
Now, substituting these values into our equation, test for equality:
y1 (t) + y2 (t) = sin(3[x1 (t) + x2 (t)])
The equality is not satisﬁed, and therefore the sine operation is not additive.

3.5 Homogeneity
A system satisﬁes the condition of homogeneity if an input scaled by a certain factor
produces an output scaled by that same factor. By deﬁnition: an input of ax1 results in an
output of ay1 . In other words, to see if function f() is homogeneous, perform the following
test:
Stimulate the system f with an arbitrary input x to produce an output y:
y = f (x)
Now, create a second input x1 , scale it by a multiplicative factor C (C is an arbitrary
constant value), and produce a corresponding output y1 :
y1 = f (Cx1 )
Now, assign x to be equal to x1 :
x1 = x
Then, for the system to be homogeneous, the following equation must be true:
y1 = f (Cx) = Cf (x) = Cy
Systems that are homogeneous are useful in many applications, especially applications with
gain or ampliﬁcation.

19

System Identiﬁcation

3.5.1 Example: Straight-Line
Given the equation for a straight line:
y = f (x) = 2x + 3
y1 = f (Cx1 ) = 2(Cx1 ) + 3 = C2x1 + 3
x1 = x
Comparing the two results, it is easy to see they are not equal:
y1 = C2x + 3 ̸= Cy = C(2x + 3) = C2x + C3
Therefore, the equation is not homogeneous.
Exercise:
Prove that additivity implies homogeneity, but that homogeneity does not imply additivity.

3.6 Linearity
A system is considered linear if it satisﬁes the conditions of Additivity and Homogeneity.
In short, a system is linear if the following is true:
Take two arbitrary inputs, and produce two arbitrary outputs:
y1 = f (x1 )

y2 = f (x2 )
Now, a linear combination of the inputs should produce a linear combination of the outputs:
f (Ax1 + Bx2 ) = f (Ax1 ) + f (Bx2 ) = Af (x1 ) + Bf (x2 ) = Ay1 + By2
This condition of additivity and homogeneity is called superposition. A system is linear
if it satisﬁes the condition of superposition.

3.6.1 Example: Linear Diﬀerential Equations
Is the following equation linear:
dy(t)
dt + y(t) = x(t)

To determine whether this system is linear, construct a new composite input:

20

Memory

x(t) = Ax1 (t) + Bx2 (t)
Now, create the expected composite output:
y(t) = Ay1 (t) + By2 (t)
Substituting the two into our original equation:
d[Ay1 (t)+By2 (t)]
+ [Ay1 (t) + By2 (t)] = Ax1 (t) + Bx2 (t)
dt

Factor out the derivative operator, as such:
d
dt [Ay1 (t) + By2 (t)] + [Ay1 (t) + By2 (t)] = Ax1 (t) + Bx2 (t)

Finally, convert the various composite terms into the respective variables, to prove that
this system is linear:
dy(t)
dt + y(t) = x(t)

For the record, derivatives and integrals are linear operators, and ordinary diﬀerential
equations typically are linear equations.

3.7 Memory
A system is said to have memory if the output from the system is dependent on past inputs
(or future inputs!) to the system. A system is called memoryless if the output is only
dependent on the current input. Memoryless systems are easier to work with, but systems
with memory are more common in digital signal processing applications.
Systems that have memory are called dynamic systems, and systems that do not have
memory are static systems.

3.8 Causality
Causality is a property that is very similar to memory. A system is called causal if it is only
dependent on past and/or current inputs. A system is called anti-causal if the output of
the system is dependent only on future inputs. A system is called non-causal if the output
depends on past and/or current and future inputs.

A system design that is not causal cannot be physically implemented (to operate in a
real-time). If the system can't be built, the design is generally worthless. However,
there are applications of non-causal systems, e.g. when a system does not need to
operate in a real-time and already has signals stored in its memory (sound and image
compression).

21

System Identiﬁcation

3.9 Time-Invariance
A system is called time-invariant if the system relationship between the input and output
signals is not dependent on the passage of time. If the input signal x(t) produces an output
y(t) then any time shifted input, x(t + δ), results in a time-shifted output y(t + δ) This
property can be satisﬁed if the transfer function of the system is not a function of time
except expressed by the input and output. If a system is time-invariant then the system
block is commutative with an arbitrary delay. This facet of time-invariant systems will be
discussed later.
To determine if a system f is time-invariant, perform the following test:
Apply an arbitrary input x to a system and produce an arbitrary output y:
y(t) = f (x(t))
Apply a second input x1 to the system, and produce a second output:
y1 (t) = f (x1 (t))
Now, assign x1 to be equal to the ﬁrst input x, time-shifted by a given constant value δ:
x1 (t) = x(t − δ)
Finally, a system is time-invariant if y1 is equal to y shifted by the same value δ:
y1 (t) = y(t − δ)

3.10 LTI Systems
A system is considered to be a Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) system if it satisﬁes the
requirements of time-invariance and linearity. LTI systems are one of the most important
types of systems, and they will be considered almost exclusively in the beginning chapters
of this book.
Systems which are not LTI are more common in practice, but are much more diﬃcult to
analyze.

3.11 Lumpedness
A system is said to be lumped if one of the two following conditions are satisﬁed:
1. There are a ﬁnite number of states that the system can be in.
2. There are a ﬁnite number of state variables.

22

Relaxed
The concept of ”states” and ”state variables” are relatively advanced, and they will be
discussed in more detail in the discussion about modern controls.
Systems which are not lumped are called distributed. A simple example of a distributed
system is a system with delay, that is, A(s)y(t) = B(s)u(t − τ ), which has an inﬁnite number
of state variables (Here we use s to denote the Laplace variable). However, although
distributed systems are quite common, they are very diﬃcult to analyze in practice, and
there are few tools available to work with such systems. Fortunately, in most cases, a
delay can be suﬃciently modeled with the Pade approximation. This book will not discuss
distributed systems much.

3.12 Relaxed
A system is said to be relaxed if the system is causal, and at the initial time t0 the output
of the system is zero, i.e., there is no stored energy in the system.
y(t0 ) = f (x(t0 )) = 0
In terms of diﬀerential equations, a relaxed system is said to have ”zero initial state”. Systems without an initial state are easier to work with, but systems that are not relaxed can
frequently be modiﬁed to approximate relaxed systems.

3.13 Stability
Control Systems engineers will frequently say that an unstable system has ”exploded”.
Some physical systems actually can rupture or explode when they go unstable.
Stability is a very important concept in systems, but it is also one of the hardest function
properties to prove. There are several diﬀerent criteria for system stability, but the most
common requirement is that the system must produce a ﬁnite output when subjected to
a ﬁnite input. For instance, if 5 volts is applied to the input terminals of a given circuit,
it would be best if the circuit output didn't approach inﬁnity, and the circuit itself didn't
melt or explode. This type of stability is often known as ”Bounded Input, Bounded
Output” stability, or BIBO.
There are a number of other types of stability, most of which are based oﬀ the concept of
BIBO stability. Because stability is such an important and complicated topic, an entire
section of this text is devoted to its study.

3.14 Inputs and Outputs
Systems can also be categorized by the number of inputs and the number of outputs the
system has. Consider a television as a system, for instance. The system has two inputs:

23

System Identiﬁcation
the power wire and the signal cable. It has one output: the video display. A system with
one input and one output is called single-input, single output, or SISO. a system with
multiple inputs and multiple outputs is called multi-input, multi-output, or MIMO.
These systems will be discussed in more detail later.
Exercise:
Based on the deﬁnitions of SISO and MIMO, above, determine what the acronyms SIMO
and MISO mean.

24

4 Digital and Analog
4.1 Digital and Analog
There is a signiﬁcant distinction between an analog system and a digital system, in the
same way that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between analog and digital data. This book is
going to consider both analog and digital topics, so it is worth taking some time to discuss
the diﬀerences, and to display the diﬀerent notations that will be used with each.

4.1.1 Continuous Time
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: isct
A signal is called continuous-time if it is deﬁned at every time t.
A system is a continuous-time system if it takes a continuous-time input signal, and outputs
a continuous-time output signal. Here is an example of an analog waveform:

Figure 3

25

Digital and Analog

4.1.2 Discrete Time
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: isdt
A signal is called discrete-time if it is only deﬁned for particular points in time. A discretetime system takes discrete-time input signals, and produces discrete-time output signals.
The following image shows the diﬀerence between an analog waveform and the sampled
discrete time equivalent:

Figure 4

4.1.3 Quantized
A signal is called Quantized if it can only be certain values, and cannot be other values.
This concept is best illustrated with examples:
1. Students with a strong background in physics will recognize this concept as being the
root word in ”Quantum Mechanics”. In quantum mechanics, it is known that energy
comes only in discrete packets. An electron bound to an atom, for example, may
occupy one of several discrete energy levels, but not intermediate levels.
2. Another common example is population statistics. For instance, a common statistic
is that a household in a particular country may have an average of ”3.5 children”, or
some other fractional number. Actual households may have 3 children, or they may
have 4 children, but no household has 3.5 children.
3. People with a computer science background will recognize that integer variables are
quantized because they can only hold certain integer values, not fractions or decimal
points.

26

Analog
The last example concerning computers is the most relevant, because quantized systems
are frequently computer-based. Systems that are implemented with computer software and
hardware will typically be quantized.
Here is an example waveform of a quantized signal. Notice how the magnitude of the wave
can only take certain values, and that creates a step-like appearance. This image is discrete
in magnitude, but is continuous in time:

Figure 5

4.2 Analog
By deﬁnition:
Analog
A signal is considered analog if it is deﬁned for all points in time and if it can take any
real magnitude value within its range.
An analog system is a system that represents data using a direct conversion from one form
to another. In other words, an analog system is a system that is continuous in both time
and magnitude.

4.2.1 Example: Motor
If we have a given motor, we can show that the output of the motor (rotation in units of
radians per second, for instance) is a function of the voltage that is input to the motor.
We can show the relationship as such:

27

Digital and Analog

Θ(v) = f (v)
Where Θ is the output in terms of Rad/sec, and f(v) is the motor's conversion function
between the input voltage (v) and the output. For any value of v we can calculate out
speciﬁcally what the rotational speed of the motor should be.

4.2.2 Example: Analog Clock
Consider a standard analog clock, which represents the passage of time though the
angular position of the clock hands. We can denote the angular position of the hands of
the clock with the system of equations:
ϕh = fh (t)
ϕm = fm (t)
ϕs = fs (t)
Where φh is the angular position of the hour hand, φm is the angular position of the
minute hand, and φs is the angular position of the second hand. The positions of all
the diﬀerent hands of the clock are dependent on functions of time.
Diﬀerent positions on a clock face correspond directly to diﬀerent times of the day.

4.3 Digital
Digital data is represented by discrete number values. By deﬁnition:
Digital
A signal or system is considered digital if it is both discrete-time and quantized.
Digital data always have a certain granularity, and therefore there will almost always be an
error associated with using such data, especially if we want to account for all real numbers.
The tradeoﬀ, of course, to using a digital system is that our powerful computers with our
powerful, Moore's law microprocessor units, can be instructed to operate on digital data
only. This beneﬁt more than makes up for the shortcomings of a digital representation
system.
Discrete systems will be denoted inside square brackets, as is a common notation in texts
that deal with discrete values. For instance, we can denote a discrete data set of ascending
numbers, starting at 1, with the following notation:
x[n] = [1 2 3 4 5 6 ...]
n, or other letters from the central area of the alphabet (m, i, j, k, l, for instance) are
commonly used to denote discrete time values. Analog, or ”non-discrete” values are denoted
in regular expression syntax, using parenthesis. Here is an example of an analog waveform
and the digital equivalent. Notice that the digital waveform is discrete in both time and
magnitude:

28

Hybrid Systems

Figure 6

Figure 7
Analog Waveform

Digital Waveform

4.3.1 Example: Digital Clock
As a common example, let's consider a digital clock: The digital clock represents time
with binary electrical data signals of 1 and 0. The 1's are usually represented by a
positive voltage, and a 0 is generally represented by zero voltage. Counting in binary,
we can show that any given time can be represented by a base-2 numbering system:
Minute
1
10
30
59

Binary Representation
1
1010
11110
111011

But what happens if we want to display a fraction of a minute, or a fraction of a second?
A typical digital clock has a certain amount of precision, and it cannot express fractional
values smaller than that precision.

4.4 Hybrid Systems
Hybrid Systems are systems that have both analog and digital components. Devices
called samplers are used to convert analog signals into digital signals, and Devices called
reconstructors are used to convert digital signals into analog signals. Because of the use
of samplers, hybrid systems are frequently called sampled-data systems.

4.4.1 Example: Automobile Computer
Most modern automobiles today have integrated computer systems that monitor certain
aspects of the car, and actually help to control the performance of the car. The speed
of the car, and the rotational speed of the transmission are analog values, but a sampler

29

Digital and Analog

converts them into digital values so the car computer can monitor them. The digital
computer will then output control signals to other parts of the car, to alter analog
systems such as the engine timing, the suspension, the brakes, and other parts. Because
the car has both digital and analog components, it is a hybrid system.

4.5 Continuous and Discrete
Note:
We are not using the word ”continuous” here in the sense of continuously diﬀerentiable,
as is common in math texts.
A system is considered continuous-time if the signal exists for all time. Frequently, the
terms ”analog” and ”continuous” will be used interchangeably, although they are not strictly
the same.
Discrete systems can come in three ﬂavors:
1. Discrete time (sampled)
2. Discrete magnitude (quantized)
3. Discrete time and magnitude (digital)
Discrete magnitude systems are systems where the signal value can only have certain
values.Discrete time systems are systems where signals are only available (or valid) at
particular times. Computer systems are discrete in the sense of (3), in that data is only
read at speciﬁc discrete time intervals, and the data can have only a limited number of
discrete values.
A discrete-time system has a sampling time value associated with it, such that each
discrete value occurs at multiples of the given sampling time. We will denote the sampling
time of a system as T. We can equate the square-brackets notation of a system with the
continuous deﬁnition of the system as follows:
x[n] = x(nT )
Notice that the two notations show the same thing, but the ﬁrst one is typically easier to
write, and it shows that the system in question is a discrete system. This book will use
the square brackets to denote discrete systems by the sample number n, and parenthesis to
denote continuous time functions.

4.6 Sampling and Reconstruction
The process of converting analog information into digital data is called ”Sampling”. The
process of converting digital data into an analog signal is called ”Reconstruction”. We will
talk about both processes in a later chapter. For more information on the topic than is

30

Sampling and Reconstruction
available in this book, see the Analog and Digital Conversion1 wikibook. Here is an example
of a reconstructed waveform. Notice that the reconstructed waveform here is quantized
because it is constructed from a digital signal:

Figure 8

1

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Analog%20and%20Digital%20Conversion

31

5 System Metrics
5.1 System Metrics
When a system is being designed and analyzed, it doesn't make any sense to test the system
with all manner of strange input functions, or to measure all sorts of arbitrary performance
metrics. Instead, it is in everybody's best interest to test the system with a set of standard,
simple reference functions. Once the system is tested with the reference functions, there
are a number of diﬀerent metrics that we can use to determine the system performance.
It is worth noting that the metrics presented in this chapter represent only a small number
of possible metrics that can be used to evaluate a given system. This wikibook will present
other useful metrics along the way, as their need becomes apparent.

5.2 Standard Inputs
Note:
All of the standard inputs are zero before time zero. All the standard inputs are causal.
There are a number of standard inputs that are considered simple enough and universal
enough that they are considered when designing a system. These inputs are known as a
unit step, a ramp, and a parabolic input.
Unit Step
A unit step function is deﬁned piecewise as such:
[Unit Step Function]
{

u(t) =

0, t < 0
1, t ≥ 0

The unit step function is a highly important function, not only in control systems engineering, but also in signal processing, systems analysis, and all branches of engineering.
If the unit step function is input to a system, the output of the system is known as the
step response. The step response of a system is an important tool, and we will study
step responses in detail in later chapters.

33

System Metrics

Figure 9

Ramp
A unit ramp is deﬁned in terms of the unit step function, as such:
[Unit Ramp Function]
r(t) = tu(t)
It is important to note that the unit step function is simply the diﬀerential of the unit
ramp function:
∫

r(t) =

u(t)dt = tu(t)

This deﬁnition will come in handy when we learn about the Laplace Transform.

34 Figure 10

Steady State

Parabolic
A unit parabolic input is similar to a ramp input:
[Unit Parabolic Function]
1
p(t) = t2 u(t)
2
Notice also that the unit parabolic input is equal to the integral of the ramp function:
∫

p(t) =

∫

r(t)dt =

1
1
tu(t)dt = t2 u(t) = tr(t)
2
2

Again, this result will become important when we learn about the Laplace Transform.

Figure 11

Also, sinusoidal and exponential functions are considered basic, but they are too diﬃcult
to use in initial analysis of a system.

5.3 Steady State
Note:
To be more precise, we should have taken the limit as t approaches inﬁnity. However,
as a shorthand notation, we will typically say ”t equals inﬁnity”, and assume the reader
understands the shortcut that is being used.

35

System Metrics
When a unit-step function is input to a system, the steady-state value of that system is
the output value at time t = ∞. Since it is impractical (if not completely impossible) to wait
till inﬁnity to observe the system, approximations and mathematical calculations are used
to determine the steady-state value of the system. Most system responses are asymptotic,
that is that the response approaches a particular value. Systems that are asymptotic are
typically obvious from viewing the graph of that response.

5.3.1 Step Response
The step response of a system is most frequently used to analyze systems, and there is
a large amount of terminology involved with step responses. When exposed to the step
input, the system will initially have an undesirable output period known as the transient
response. The transient response occurs because a system is approaching its ﬁnal output
value. The steady-state response of the system is the response after the transient response
has ended.
The amount of time it takes for the system output to reach the desired value (before the
transient response has ended, typically) is known as the rise time. The amount of time it
takes for the transient response to end and the steady-state response to begin is known as
the settling time.
It is common for a systems engineer to try and improve the step response of a system. In
general, it is desired for the transient response to be reduced, the rise and settling times to
be shorter, and the steady-state to approach a particular desired ”reference” output.

Figure 12

Figure 13
An arbitrary step function with

A step response graph of input x(t) to a made-up system

x(t) = M u(t)

5.4 Target Value
The target output value is the value that our system attempts to obtain for a given input.
This is not the same as the steady-state value, which is the actual value that the system
does obtain. The target value is frequently referred to as the reference value, or the
”reference function” of the system. In essence, this is the value that we want the system to
produce. When we input a ”5” into an elevator, we want the output (the ﬁnal position of
the elevator) to be the ﬁfth ﬂoor. Pressing the ”5” button is the reference input, and is the

36

Rise Time
expected value that we want to obtain. If we press the ”5” button, and the elevator goes to
the third ﬂoor, then our elevator is poorly designed.

5.5 Rise Time
Rise time is the amount of time that it takes for the system response to reach the target
value from an initial state of zero. Many texts on the subject deﬁne the rise time as being
the time it takes to rise between the initial position and 80% of the target value. This is
because some systems never rise to 100% of the expected, target value, and therefore they
would have an inﬁnite rise-time. This book will specify which convention to use for each
individual problem. Rise time is typically denoted tr , or trise .

Rise time is not the amount of time it takes to achieve steady-state, only the amount
of time it takes to reach the desired target value for the ﬁrst time.

5.6 Percent Overshoot
Underdamped systems frequently overshoot their target value initially. This initial surge
is known as the ”overshoot value”. The ratio of the amount of overshoot to the target
steady-state value of the system is known as the percent overshoot. Percent overshoot
represents an overcompensation of the system, and can output dangerously large output
signals that can damage a system. Percent overshoot is typically denoted with the term
PO.
Example: Refrigerator
Consider an ordinary household refrigerator. The refrigerator has cycles where it is on
and when it is oﬀ. When the refrigerator is on, the coolant pump is running, and the
temperature inside the refrigerator decreases. The temperature decreases to a much
lower level than is required, and then the pump turns oﬀ.
When the pump is oﬀ, the temperature slowly increases again as heat is absorbed into
the refrigerator. When the temperature gets high enough, the pump turns back on.
Because the pump cools down the refrigerator more than it needs to initially, we can say
that it ”overshoots” the target value by a certain speciﬁed amount.
Example: Refrigerator
Another example concerning a refrigerator concerns the electrical demand of the heat
pump when it ﬁrst turns on. The pump is an inductive mechanical motor, and when
the motor ﬁrst activates, a special counter-acting force known as ”back EMF” resists
the motion of the motor, and causes the pump to draw more electricity until the motor
reaches its ﬁnal speed. During the startup time for the pump, lights on the same electrical

37

System Metrics

circuit as the refrigerator may dim slightly, as electricity is drawn away from the lamps,
and into the pump. This initial draw of electricity is a good example of overshoot.

5.7 Steady-State Error
Usually, the letter e or E will be used to denote error values.
Sometimes a system might never achieve the desired steady-state value, but instead will
settle on an output value that is not desired. The diﬀerence between the steady-state output
value to the reference input value at steady state is called the steady-state error of the
system. We will use the variable ess to denote the steady-state error of the system.

5.8 Settling Time
After the initial rise time of the system, some systems will oscillate and vibrate for an
amount of time before the system output settles on the ﬁnal value. The amount of time it
takes to reach steady state after the initial rise time is known as the settling time. Notice
that damped oscillating systems may never settle completely, so we will deﬁne settling time
as being the amount of time for the system to reach, and stay in, a certain acceptable
range. The acceptable range for settling time is typically determined on a per-problem
basis, although common values are 20%, 10%, or 5% of the target value. The settling time
will be denoted as ts .

5.9 System Order
The order of the system is deﬁned by the number of independent energy storage elements
in the system, and intuitively by the highest order of the linear diﬀerential equation that
describes the system. In a transfer function representation, the order is the highest exponent
in the transfer function. In a proper system, the system order is deﬁned as the degree of
the denominator polynomial. In a state-space equation, the system order is the number of
state-variables used in the system. The order of a system will frequently be denoted with
an n or N, although these variables are also used for other purposes. This book will make
clear distinction on the use of these variables.

5.9.1 Proper Systems
A proper system is a system where the degree of the denominator is larger than or equal
to the degree of the numerator polynomial. A strictly proper system is a system where
the degree of the denominator polynomial is larger than (but never equal to) the degree
of the numerator polynomial. A biproper system is a system where the degree of the
denominator polynomial equals the degree of the numerator polynomial.

38

System Type
It is important to note that only proper systems can be physically realized. In other words,
a system that is not proper cannot be built. It makes no sense to spend a lot of time
designing and analyzing imaginary systems.

5.9.2 Example: System Order
1=Find the order of this system:
G(s) =

1+s
1 + s + s2

The highest exponent in the denominator is s2 , so the system is order 2. Also, since the
denominator is a higher degree than the numerator, this system is strictly proper.}}
In the above example, G(s) is a second-order transfer function because in the denominator
one of the s variables has an exponent of 2. Second-order functions are the easiest to work
with.

5.10 System Type
Let's say that we have a process transfer function (or combination of functions, such as a
controller feeding in to a process), all in the forward branch of a unity feedback loop. Say
that the overall forward branch transfer function is in the following generalized form (known
as pole-zero form):
[Pole-Zero Form]
∏

K (s − si )
G(s) = M ∏i
s
j (s − sj )
Poles at the origin are called integrators, because they have the eﬀect of performing
integration on the input signal.
we call the parameter M the system type. Note that increased system type number
correspond to larger numbers of poles at s = 0. More poles at the origin generally have
a beneﬁcial eﬀect on the system, but they increase the order of the system, and make it
increasingly diﬃcult to implement physically. System type will generally be denoted with a
letter like N, M, or m. Because these variables are typically reused for other purposes, this
book will make clear distinction when they are employed.
Now, we will deﬁne a few terms that are commonly used when discussing system type.
These new terms are Position Error, Velocity Error, and Acceleration Error. These
names are throwbacks to physics terms where acceleration is the derivative of velocity, and
velocity is the derivative of position. Note that none of these terms are meant to deal with
movement, however.
Position Error

39

System Metrics
The position error, denoted by the position error constant Kp . This is the amount
of steady-state error of the system when stimulated by a unit step input. We deﬁne the
position error constant as follows:
[Position Error Constant]
Kp = lim G(s)
s→0

Where G(s) is the transfer function of our system.
Velocity Error
The velocity error is the amount of steady-state error when the system is stimulated with
a ramp input. We deﬁne the velocity error constant as such:
[Velocity Error Constant]
Kv = lim sG(s)
s→0

Acceleration Error
The acceleration error is the amount of steady-state error when the system is stimulated
with a parabolic input. We deﬁne the acceleration error constant to be:
[Acceleration Error Constant]
Ka = lim s2 G(s)
s→0

Now, this table will show brieﬂy the relationship between the system type, the kind of input
(step, ramp, parabolic), and the steady-state error of the system:

Type, M
0
1
2
>2

Unit System Input
Au(t)
A
ess = 1+K
p
ess = 0
ess = 0
ess = 0

Ar(t)
ess = ∞
ess = KAv
ess = 0
ess = 0

Ap(t)
ess = ∞
ess = ∞
ess = KAa
ess = 0

5.10.1 Z-Domain Type
Likewise, we can show that the system order can be found from the following generalized
transfer function in the Z domain:
∏

K i (z − zi )
∏
G(z) =
(z − 1)M j (z − zj )

40

Visually
Where the constant M is the type of the digital system. Now, we will show how to ﬁnd the
various error constants in the Z-Domain:
[Z-Domain Error Constants]
Error Constant
Kp
Kv
Ka

Equation
Kp = limz→1 G(z)
Kv = limz→1 (z − 1)G(z)
Ka = limz→1 (z − 1)2 G(z)

5.11 Visually
Here is an image of the various system metrics, acting on a system in response to a step
input:

Figure 14

The target value is the value of the input step response. The rise time is the time at which
the waveform ﬁrst reaches the target value. The overshoot is the amount by which the
waveform exceeds the target value. The settling time is the time it takes for the system
to settle into a particular bounded region. This bounded region is denoted with two short
dotted lines above and below the target value.

41

6 System Modeling
6.1 The Control Process
It is the job of a control engineer to analyze existing systems, and to design new systems
to meet speciﬁc needs. Sometimes new systems need to be designed, but more frequently a
controller unit needs to be designed to improve the performance of existing systems. When
designing a system, or implementing a controller to augment an existing system, we need
to follow some basic steps:
1. Model the system mathematically
2. Analyze the mathematical model
3. Design system/controller
4. Implement system/controller and test
The vast majority of this book is going to be focused on (2), the analysis of the mathematical
systems. This chapter alone will be devoted to a discussion of the mathematical modeling
of the systems.

6.2 External Description
An external description of a system relates the system input to the system output without explicitly taking into account the internal workings of the system. The external description of a system is sometimes also referred to as the Input-Output Description of
the system, because it only deals with the inputs and the outputs to the system.

Figure 15

If the system can be represented by a mathematical function h(t, r), where t is the time
that the output is observed, and r is the time that the input is applied. We can relate the
system function h(t, r) to the input x and the output y through the use of an integral:
[General System Description]

43

System Modeling
∫ ∞

y(t) =

−∞

h(t, r)x(r)dr

This integral form holds for all linear systems, and every linear system can be described by
such an equation.
If a system is causal (i.e. an input at t=r aﬀects system behaviour only for t ≥ r) and there
is no input of the system before t=0, we can change the limits of the integration:
∫ t

y(t) =

h(t, r)x(r)dr
0

6.2.1 Time-Invariant Systems
If furthermore a system is time-invariant, we can rewrite the system description equation
as follows:
∫ t

y(t) =
0

h(t − r)x(r)dr

This equation is known as the convolution integral, and we will discuss it more in the
next chapter.
Every Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) system can be used with the Laplace Transform,
a powerful tool that allows us to convert an equation from the time domain into the SDomain, where many calculations are easier. Time-variant systems cannot be used with
the Laplace Transform.

6.3 Internal Description
If a system is linear and lumped, it can also be described using a system of equations known
as state-space equations. In state-space equations, we use the variable x to represent the
internal state of the system. We then use u as the system input, and we continue to use
y as the system output. We can write the state-space equations as such:
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t) + B(t)u(t)

y(t) = C(t)x(t) + D(t)u(t)
We will discuss the state-space equations more when we get to the section on modern
controls.

44

Analysis

6.4 Complex Descriptions
Systems which are LTI and Lumped can also be described using a combination of the statespace equations, and the Laplace Transform. If we take the Laplace Transform of the state
equations that we listed above, we can get a set of functions known as the Transfer Matrix
Functions. We will discuss these functions in a later chapter.

6.5 Representations
To recap, we will prepare a table with the various system properties, and the available
methods for describing the system:
Properties
Linear, Time-Variant, Distributed
Linear, Time-Variant, Lumped
Linear, Time-Invariant, Distributed
Linear, Time-Invariant, Lumped

State-Space
Equations
no
yes
no
yes

Laplace
Transform
no
no
yes
yes

Transfer
Matrix
no
no
no
yes

We will discuss all these diﬀerent types of system representation later in the book.

6.6 Analysis
Once a system is modeled using one of the representations listed above, the system needs to
be analyzed. We can determine the system metrics and then we can compare those metrics
to our speciﬁcation. If our system meets the speciﬁcations we are ﬁnished with the design
process. However if the system does not meet the speciﬁcations (as is typically the case),
then suitable controllers and compensators need to be designed and added to the system.
Once the controllers and compensators have been designed, the job isn't ﬁnished: we need
to analyze the new composite system to ensure that the controllers work properly. Also, we
need to ensure that the systems are stable: unstable systems can be dangerous.

6.6.1 Frequency Domain
For proposals, early stage designs, and quick turn around analyses a frequency domain model
is often superior to a time domain model. Frequency domain models take disturbance PSDs
(Power Spectral Densities) directly, use transfer functions directly, and produce output or
residual PSDs directly. The answer is a steady-state response. Oftentimes the controller is
shooting for 0 so the steady-state response is also the residual error that will be the analysis
output or metric for report.
Table 1: Frequency Domain Model Inputs and Outputs
Input
Model
Output

45

System Modeling
PSD

Transfer Function

PSD

Brief Overview of the Math
Frequency domain modeling is a matter of determining the impulse response of a system to
a random process.

Figure 16

Figure 1: Frequency Domain System

SY Y (ω) = G∗ (ω) G (ω) SXX = |G (ω)| SXX 1
where
SXX (ω) is the one-sided input PSD in magnitude
Hz

2

G (ω) is the frequency response function of the system and
SY Y (ω) is the one-sided output PSD or auto power spectral density function.
The frequency response function, G (ω), is related to the impulse response function (transfer
function) by
1
g (τ ) =
2π

∫ ∞
−∞

eiωt H (ω) dω

Note some texts will state that this is only valid for random processes which are stationary. Other texts suggest stationary and ergodic while still others state weakly stationary
processes. Some texts do not distinguish between strictly stationary and weakly stationary.
From practice, the rule of thumb is if the PSD of the input process is the same from hour
to hour and day to day then the input PSD can be used and the above equation is valid.
Notes
See a full explanation with example at ControlTheoryPro.com2

1

2

46

Sun, Jian-Qiao (2006). Stochastic Dynamics and Control, Volume 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
0444522301
.
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Frequency_Domain_Modeling

Modeling Examples

6.7 Modeling Examples
Modeling in Control Systems is oftentimes a matter of judgement. This judgement is developed by creating models and learning from other people's models. ControlTheoryPro.com
is a site with a lot of examples. Here are links to a few of them
• Hovering Helicopter Example3
• Reaction Torque Cancellation Example4
• List of all examples at ControlTheoryPro.com5

6.8 Manufacture
Once the system has been properly designed we can prototype our system and test it.
Assuming our analysis was correct and our design is good, the prototype should work as
expected. Now we can move on to manufacture and distribute our completed systems.

3
4
5

http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Helicopter_Hover_Example
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Reaction_Cancellation_Example
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Category:Examples

47

7 Transforms
7.1 Transforms
There are a number of transforms that we will be discussing throughout this book, and the
reader is assumed to have at least a small prior knowledge of them. It is not the intention of
this book to teach the topic of transforms to an audience that has had no previous exposure
to them. However, we will include a brief refresher here to refamiliarize people who maybe
cannot remember the topic perfectly. If you do not know what the Laplace Transform or
the Fourier Transform are yet, it is highly recommended that you use this page as a
simple guide, and look the information up on other sources. Speciﬁcally, Wikipedia1 has
lots of information on these subjects.

7.1.1 Transform Basics
A transform is a mathematical tool that converts an equation from one variable (or one
set of variables) into a new variable (or a new set of variables). To do this, the transform
must remove all instances of the ﬁrst variable, the ”Domain Variable”, and add a new ”Range
Variable”. Integrals are excellent choices for transforms, because the limits of the deﬁnite
integral will be substituted into the domain variable, and all instances of that variable will
be removed from the equation. An integral transform that converts from a domain variable
a to a range variable b will typically be formatted as such:
T [f (a)] = F (b) =

∫

f (a)g(a, b)da
C

Where the function f(a) is the function being transformed, and g(a,b) is known as the
kernel of the transform. Typically, the only diﬀerence between the various integral transforms is the kernel.

7.2 Laplace Transform
w:Laplace transform2
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: laplace

1
2

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace%20transform

49

Transforms
The Laplace Transform converts an equation from the time-domain into the so-called ”Sdomain”, or the Laplace domain, or even the ”Complex domain”. These are all diﬀerent
names for the same mathematical space and they all may be used interchangeably in this
book and in other texts on the subject. The Transform can only be applied under the
following conditions:
1. The system or signal in question is analog.
2. The system or signal in question is Linear.
3. The system or signal in question is Time-Invariant.
4. The system or signal in question is causal.
The transform is deﬁned as such:
[Laplace Transform]
∫

F (s) = L[f (t)] = 0∞ f (t)e−st dt
Laplace transform results have been tabulated extensively. More information on the Laplace
transform, including a transform table can be found in the Appendix3 .
If we have a linear diﬀerential equation in the time domain:
y(t) = ax(t) + bx′ (t) + cx′′ (t)
With zero initial conditions, we can take the Laplace transform of the equation as such:
Y (s) = aX(s) + bsX(s) + cs2 X(s)
And separating, we get:
Y (s) = X(s)[a + bs + cs2 ]

7.2.1 Inverse Laplace Transform
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: ilaplace
The inverse Laplace Transform is deﬁned as such:

[Inverse Laplace Transform]
∫

c+i∞ st
1
f (t) = L−1 {F (s)} = 2πi
c−i∞ e F (s) ds

The inverse transform converts a function from the Laplace domain back into the time
domain.
3

50

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FTransforms%20Appendix

Laplace Transform

7.2.2 Matrices and Vectors
The Laplace Transform can be used on systems of linear equations in an intuitive way. Let's
say that we have a system of linear equations:
y1 (t) = a1 x1 (t)

y2 (t) = a2 x2 (t)
We can arrange these equations into matrix form, as shown:
[

]

[

y1 (t)
a
0
= 1
y2 (t)
0 a2

][

]

x1 (t)
x2 (t)

And write this symbolically as:
y(t) = Ax(t)
We can take the Laplace transform of both sides:
L[y(t)] = Y(s) = L[Ax(t)] = AL[x(t)] = AX(s)
Which is the same as taking the transform of each individual equation in the system of
equations.

7.2.3 Example: RL Circuit
For more information about electric circuits, see:
Circuit Theorya
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Circuit%20Theory

Here, we are going to show a common example of a ﬁrst-order system, an RL Circuit. In
an inductor, the relationship between the current, I, and the voltage, V, in the time domain
is expressed as a derivative:
V (t) = L

dI(t)
dt

Where L is a special quantity called the ”Inductance” that is a property of inductors.

51

Transforms

Figure 17 Circuit diagram for the RL circuit example problem. VL is the voltage
over the inductor, and is the quantity we are trying to ﬁnd.

Let's say that we have a 1st order RL series electric circuit. The resistor has resistance
R, the inductor has inductance L, and the voltage source has input voltage Vin . The
system output of our circuit is the voltage over the inductor, Vout . In the time domain,
we have the following ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equations to describe the circuit:
Vout (t) = VL (t) = L dI(t)
dt
Vin (t) = RI(t) + L dI(t)
dt
However, since the circuit is essentially acting as a voltage divider, we can put the
output in terms of the input as follows:
Vout (t) =

dI(t)
dt
dI(t)
RI(t)+L dt

L

Vin (t)

This is a very complicated equation, and will be diﬃcult to solve unless we employ the
Laplace transform:
Ls
Vout (s) = R+Ls
Vin (s)

We can divide top and bottom by L, and move Vin to the other side:
Vout
s
Vin = R +s
L

And using a simple table look-up, we can solve this for the time-domain relationship
between the circuit input and the circuit output:
Vout
d ( −Rt
L ) u(t)
Vin = dt e

52

Laplace Transform

7.2.4 Partial Fraction Expansion
For more information about Partial Fraction Expansion, see:
Calculusa
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Calculus

Laplace transform pairs are extensively tabulated, but frequently we have transfer functions
and other equations that do not have a tabulated inverse transform. If our equation is a
fraction, we can often utilize Partial Fraction Expansion (PFE) to create a set of simpler
terms that will have readily available inverse transforms. This section is going to give a
brief reminder about PFE, for those who have already learned the topic. This refresher will
be in the form of several examples of the process, as it relates to the Laplace Transform.
People who are unfamiliar with PFE are encouraged to read more about it in Calculus4 .

7.2.5 Example: Second-Order System
If we have a given equation in the S-domain:
F (s) = s22s+1
+3s+2
We can expand it into several smaller fractions as such:
2s+1
A
B
F (s) = (s+1)(s+2)
= (s+1)
+ (s+2)
= A(s+2)+B(s+1)
(s+1)(s+2)

This looks impossible, because we have a single equation with 3 unknowns (s, A, B),
but in reality s can take any arbitrary value, and we can ”plug in” values for s to solve
for A and B, without needing other equations. For instance, in the above equation, we
can multiply through by the denominator, and cancel terms:
(2s + 1) = A(s + 2) + B(s + 1)
Now, when we set s → -2, the A term disappears, and we are left with B → 3. When
we set s → -1, we can solve for A → -1. Putting these values back into our original
equation, we have:
−1
3
F (s) = (s+1)
+ (s+2)

Remember, since the Laplace transform is a linear operator, the following relationship
holds true:
[

]

[

]

[

−1
3
3
−1
L−1 [F (s)] = L−1 (s+1)
+ (s+2)
+ L−1 (s+2)
= L−1 s+1

]

Finding the inverse transform of these smaller terms should be an easier process then
ﬁnding the inverse transform of the whole function. Partial fraction expansion is a
useful, and oftentimes necessary tool for ﬁnding the inverse of an S-domain equation.

4

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Calculus

53

Transforms

7.2.6 Example: Fourth-Order System
If we have a given equation in the S-domain:
2

+916s+1000
F (s) = 79s s(s+10)
3

We can expand it into several smaller fractions as such:
B
C
D
F (s) = As + (s+10)
3 + (s+10)2 + s+10
3

2

F (s) = A(s+10) +Bs+Cs(s+10)+Ds(s+10)
s(s+10)3

A(s + 10)3 + Bs + Cs(s + 10) + Ds(s + 10)2 = 79s2 + 916s + 1000
Canceling terms wouldn't be enough here, we will open the brackets (separated onto
multiple lines):
As3 + 30As2 + 300As + 1000A + Bs+
Cs2 + 10Cs + Ds3 + 20Ds2 + 100Ds
= 79s2 + 916s + 1000
Let's compare coeﬃcients:
A+D=0
30A + C + 20D = 79
300A + B + 10C + 100D = 916
1000A = 1000
And solving gives us:
A=1
B = 26
C = 69
D = -1
We know from the Laplace Transform table that the following relation holds:
n
1
→ tn! e−αt · u(t)
(s+α)n+1

We can plug in our values for A, B, C, and D into our expansion, and try to convert it
into the form above.
C
D
B
F (s) = As + (s+10)
3 + (s+10)2 + s+10
1
1
1
F (s) = A 1s + B (s+10)
3 + C (s+10)2 + D s+10
1
1
1
F (s) = 1 1s + 26 (s+10)
3 + 69 (s+10)2 − 1 s+10

f (t) = u(t) + 13t2 e−10t + 69te−10t − e−10t

54

Laplace Transform

7.2.7 Example: Complex Roots
Given the following transfer function:
7s+26
As+B
= s2 −80s+1681
F (s) = s2 −80s+1681

When the solution of the denominator is a complex number, we use a complex representation A + iB, like 3+i4 as opposed to the use of a single letter (e.g. D) - which is
for real numbers:
As + B = 7s + 26
A=7
B = 26
We will need to reform it into two fractions that look like this (without changing its
value):
e−αt sin(ωt) · u(t) → (s+α)ω2 +ω2
s+α
e−αt cos(ωt) · u(t) → (s+α)
2 +ω 2

Let's start with the denominator (for both fractions):
The roots of s2 - 80s + 1681 are 40 + j9 and 40 - j9.
As+B
(s + a)2 + ω 2 = (s − 40)2 + 92 → (s−40)
2 +92

And now the numerators:
As+40A−40A+B
(s−40)2 +92
As−40A
B+40A
+ (s−40)
2 +92
(s−40)2 +92
(s−40)
9
B+40A
A (s−40)
2 +92 +
9
(s−40)2 +92

Inverse Laplace Transform:
f (t) = 7e40t cos(9t) + 34e40t sin(9t)

7.2.8 Example: Sixth-Order System
Given the following transfer function:
90s −1110
A
B
Cs+D
F (s) = s(s−3)(s
2 −12s+37) = s + s−3 + s2 −12s+37
2

We multiply through by the denominators to make the equation rational:
A(s − 3)(s2 − 12s + 37) + Bs(s2 − 12s + 37) + (Cs + D)s(s − 3)
= 90s2 − 1110
And then we combine terms:
As3 − 15As2 + 73As − 111A + Bs3 − 12Bs2 + 37Bs + Cs3 − 3Cs2 + Ds2 − 3Ds

55

Transforms

= 90s2 − 1110
Comparing coeﬃcients:
A+B+C=0
-15A - 12B - 3C + D = 90
73A + 37B - 3D = 0
-111A = -1110
Now, we can solve for A, B, C and D:
A = 10
B = -10
C=0
D = 120
And now for the ”ﬁtting”:
The roots of s2 - 12s + 37 are 6 + j and 6 - j
1
A 1s + B s−3
+ C (s−6)s2 +12 + D (s−6)12 +12

No need to ﬁt the fraction of D, because it is complete; no need to bother ﬁtting the
fraction of C, because C is equal to zero.
1
10 1s − 10 s−3
+ 0 (s−6)s2 +12 + 120 (s−6)12 +12

f (t) = 10u(t) − 10e3t + 120e6t sin(t)

7.2.9 Final Value Theorem
The Final Value Theorem allows us to determine the value of the time domain equation,
as the time approaches inﬁnity, from the S domain equation. In Control Engineering,
the Final Value Theorem is used most frequently to determine the steady-state value of a
system. The real part of the poles of the function must be <0.
[Final Value Theorem (Laplace)]
lim x(t) = lim sX(s)

t→∞

s→0

From our chapter on system metrics, you may recognize the value of the system at time
inﬁnity as the steady-state time of the system. The diﬀerence between the steady state value
and the expected output value we remember as being the steady-state error of the system.
Using the Final Value Theorem, we can ﬁnd the steady-state value and the steady-state
error of the system in the Complex S domain.

56

Laplace Transform

7.2.10 Example: Final Value Theorem
Find the ﬁnal value of the following polynomial:
1+s
T (s) = 1+2s+s
2

We can apply the Final Value Theorem:
1+s
lims→ 0 s 1+2s+s
2

We obtain the value:
1+0
1+s
lims→ 0 s 1+2s+s
2 = 0 · 1+2·0+02 = 0 · 1 = 0

7.2.11 Initial Value Theorem
Akin to the ﬁnal value theorem, the Initial Value Theorem allows us to determine the
initial value of the system (the value at time zero) from the S-Domain Equation. The initial
value theorem is used most frequently to determine the starting conditions, or the ”initial
conditions” of a system.
[Initial Value Theorem (Laplace)]
x(0) = lim sX(s)
s→∞

7.2.12 Common Transforms
We will now show you the transforms of the three functions we have already learned about:
The unit step, the unit ramp, and the unit parabola. The transform of the unit step function
is given by:
L[u(t)] =

1
s

And since the unit ramp is the integral of the unit step, we can multiply the above result
times 1/s to get the transform of the unit ramp:
L[r(t)] =

1
s2

Again, we can multiply by 1/s to get the transform of the unit parabola:
L[p(t)] =

1
s3

57

Transforms

7.3 Fourier Transform
w:Fourier Transform5
The Fourier Transform is very similar to the Laplace transform. The fourier transform
uses the assumption that any ﬁnite time-domain signal can be broken into an inﬁnite sum
of sinusoidal (sine and cosine waves) signals. Under this assumption, the Fourier Transform
converts a time-domain signal into its frequency-domain representation, as a function of the
radial frequency, ω, The Fourier Transform is deﬁned as such:
[Fourier Transform]
F (jω) = F[f (t)] =

∫ ∞

f (t)e−jωt dt

0

This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: fourier
We can now show that the Fourier Transform is equivalent to the Laplace transform, when
the following condition is true:
s = jω
Because the Laplace and Fourier Transforms are so closely related, it does not make much
sense to use both transforms for all problems. This book, therefore, will concentrate on
the Laplace transform for nearly all subjects, except those problems that deal directly with
frequency values. For frequency problems, it makes life much easier to use the Fourier
Transform representation.
Like the Laplace Transform, the Fourier Transform has been extensively tabulated. Properties of the Fourier transform, in addition to a table of common transforms is available in
the Appendix6 .

7.3.1 Inverse Fourier Transform
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: ifourier
The inverse Fourier Transform is deﬁned as follows:

[Inverse Fourier Transform]
f (t) = F

5
6

58

−1

1
{F (jω)} =
2π

∫ ∞
−∞

F (jω)ejωt dω

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier%20Transform
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FTransforms%20Appendix

Complex Plane
This transform is nearly identical to the Fourier Transform.

7.4 Complex Plane

Figure 18

Using the above equivalence, we can show that the Laplace transform is always equal to
the Fourier Transform, if the variable s is an imaginary number. However, the Laplace
transform is diﬀerent if s is a real or a complex variable. As such, we generally deﬁne s to
have both a real part and an imaginary part, as such:
s = σ + jω
And we can show that s = jω if σ = 0.
Since the variable s can be broken down into 2 independent values, it is frequently of some
value to graph the variable s on its own special ”S-plane”. The S-plane graphs the variable
σ on the horizontal axis, and the value of jω on the vertical axis. This axis arrangement is
shown at right.

7.5 Euler's Formula
There is an important result from calculus that is known as Euler's Formula, or ”Euler's
Relation”. This important formula relates the important values of e, j, π, 1 and 0:
ejπ + 1 = 0

59

Transforms
However, this result is derived from the following equation, setting ω to π:
[Euler's Formula]
ejω = cos(ω) + j sin(ω)
This formula will be used extensively in some of the chapters of this book, so it is important
to become familiar with it now.

7.6 MATLAB
The MATLAB symbolic toolbox contains functions to compute the Laplace and Fourier
transforms automatically. The function laplace, and the function fourier can be used
to calculate the Laplace and Fourier transforms of the input functions, respectively. For
instance, the code:
t = sym('t');
fx = 30*t^2 + 20*t;
laplace(fx)

produces the output:
ans =
60/s^3+20/s^2

We will discuss these functions more in The Appendix7 .

7.7 Further reading
• Digital Signal Processing/Continuous-Time Fourier Transform8
• Signals and Systems/Aperiodic Signals9
• Circuit Theory/Laplace Transform10

7
8
9
10

60

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FMATLAB
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital%20Signal%20Processing%2FContinuous-Time%
20Fourier%20Transform
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals%20and%20Systems%2FAperiodic%20Signals
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Circuit%20Theory%2FLaplace%20Transform

8 Transfer Functions
8.1 Transfer Functions
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: tf
A Transfer Function is the ratio of the output of a system to the input of a system, in
the Laplace domain considering its initial conditions and equilibrium point to be zero. This
assumption is relaxed for systems observing transience. If we have an input function of
X(s), and an output function Y(s), we deﬁne the transfer function H(s) to be:
[Transfer Function]
H(s) =

Y (s)
X(s)

Readers who have read the Circuit Theory1 book will recognize the transfer function as
being the impedance, admittance, impedance ratio of a voltage divider or the admittance
ratio of a current divider.

Figure 19

8.2 Impulse Response
Note:
Time domain variables are generally written with lower-case letters. Laplace-Domain,
and other transform domain variables are generally written using upper-case letters.

1

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Circuit%20Theory

61

Transfer Functions
For comparison, we will consider the time-domain equivalent to the above input/output
relationship. In the time domain, we generally denote the input to a system as x(t), and the
output of the system as y(t). The relationship between the input and the output is denoted
as the impulse response, h(t).
We deﬁne the impulse response as being the relationship between the system output to its
input. We can use the following equation to deﬁne the impulse response:
h(t) =

y(t)
x(t)

8.2.1 Impulse Function
It would be handy at this point to deﬁne precisely what an ”impulse” is. The Impulse
Function, denoted with δ(t) is a special function deﬁned piece-wise as follows:
[Impulse Function]




δ(t) =

0,
t<0
undeﬁned, t = 0


0,
t>0

The impulse function is also known as the delta function because it's denoted with the
Greek lower-case letter δ. The delta function is typically graphed as an arrow towards
inﬁnity, as shown below:

62

Impulse Response

Figure 20

It is drawn as an arrow because it is diﬃcult to show a single point at inﬁnity in any other
graphing method. Notice how the arrow only exists at location 0, and does not exist for any
other time t. The delta function works with regular time shifts just like any other function.
For instance, we can graph the function δ(t - N) by shifting the function δ(t) to the right,
as such:

63

Transfer Functions

Figure 21

An examination of the impulse function will show that it is related to the unit-step function
as follows:
δ(t) =

du(t)
dt

and
∫

u(t) =

δ(t)dt

The impulse function is not deﬁned at point t = 0, but the impulse must always satisfy the
following condition, or else it is not a true impulse function:
∫ ∞
−∞

δ(t)dt = 1

The response of a system to an impulse input is called the impulse response. Now, to
get the Laplace Transform of the impulse function, we take the derivative of the unit step
function, which means we multiply the transform of the unit step function by s:

64

Convolution

L[u(t)] = U (s) =
L[δ(t)] = sU (s) =

1
s

s
=1
s

This result can be veriﬁed in the transform tables in The Appendix2 .

8.2.2 Step Response
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: step3
Similar to the impulse response, the step response of a system is the output of the system
when a unit step function is used as the input. The step response is a common analysis
tool used to determine certain metrics about a system. Typically, when a new system is
designed, the step response of the system is the ﬁrst characteristic of the system to be
analyzed.

8.3 Convolution
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: conv
However, the impulse response cannot be used to ﬁnd the system output from the system
input in the same manner as the transfer function. If we have the system input and the
impulse response of the system, we can calculate the system output using the convolution
operation as such:
y(t) = h(t) ∗ x(t)
Remember: an asterisk means convolution, not multiplication!
Where ” * ” (asterisk) denotes the convolution operation. Convolution is a complicated
combination of multiplication, integration and time-shifting. We can deﬁne the convolution
between two functions, a(t) and b(t) as the following:
[Convolution]
(a ∗ b)(t) = (b ∗ a)(t) =

2

∫ ∞
−∞

a(τ )b(t − τ )dτ

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FTransforms%20Appendix%23Table%20of%
20Laplace%20Transforms

65

Transfer Functions
(The variable τ (Greek tau) is a dummy variable for integration). This operation can be
diﬃcult to perform. Therefore, many people prefer to use the Laplace Transform (or another
transform) to convert the convolution operation into a multiplication operation, through
the Convolution Theorem.

8.3.1 Time-Invariant System Response
If the system in question is time-invariant, then the general description of the system can be
replaced by a convolution integral of the system's impulse response and the system input.
We can call this the convolution description of a system, and deﬁne it below:
[Convolution Description]
y(t) = x(t) ∗ h(t) =

∫ ∞
−∞

x(τ )h(t − τ )dτ

8.4 Convolution Theorem
This method of solving for the output of a system is quite tedious, and in fact it can waste a
large amount of time if you want to solve a system for a variety of input signals. Luckily, the
Laplace transform has a special property, called the Convolution Theorem, that makes
the operation of convolution easier:
Convolution Theorem
Convolution in the time domain becomes multiplication in the complex Laplace domain.
Multiplication in the time domain becomes convolution in the complex Laplace domain.
The Convolution Theorem can be expressed using the following equations:
[Convolution Theorem]
L[f (t) ∗ g(t)] = F (s)G(s)
L[f (t)g(t)] = F (s) ∗ G(s)
This also serves as a good example of the property of Duality.

8.5 Using the Transfer Function
The Transfer Function fully describes a control system. The Order, Type and Frequency
response can all be taken from this speciﬁc function. Nyquist and Bode plots can be drawn
from the open loop Transfer Function. These plots show the stability of the system when
the loop is closed. Using the denominator of the transfer function, called the characteristic
equation, roots of the system can be derived.

66

Using the Transfer Function
For all these reasons and more, the Transfer function is an important aspect of classical
control systems. Let's start out with the deﬁnition:
Transfer Function
The Transfer function of a system is the relationship of the system's output to its input,
represented in the complex Laplace domain.
If the complex Laplace variable is s, then we generally denote the transfer function of a
system as either G(s) or H(s). If the system input is X(s), and the system output is Y(s),
then the transfer function can be deﬁned as such:
H(s) =

Y (s)
X(s)

If we know the input to a given system, and we have the transfer function of the system,
we can solve for the system output by multiplying:
[Transfer Function Description]
Y (s) = H(s)X(s)

8.5.1 Example: Impulse Response
From a Laplace transform table, we know that the Laplace transform of the impulse
function, δ(t) is:
L[δ(t)] = 1
So, when we plug this result into our relationship between the input, output, and
transfer function, we get:
Y (s) = X(s)H(s)
Y (s) = (1)H(s)
Y (s) = H(s)
In other words, the ”impulse response” is the output of the system when we input an
impulse function.

8.5.2 Example: Step Response
From the Laplace Transform table, we can also see that the transform of the unit step
function, u(t) is given by:
L[u(t)] = 1s
Plugging that result into our relation for the transfer function gives us:

67

Transfer Functions

Y (s) = X(s)H(s)
Y (s) = 1s H(s)
Y (s) = H(s)
s
And we can see that the step response is simply the impulse response divided by s.

8.5.3 Example: MATLAB Step Response
Use MATLAB to ﬁnd the step response of the following transfer function:
2

+916s+1000
F (s) = 79s s(s+10)
3

We can separate out our numerator and denominator polynomials as such:
num = [79 916 1000]; den = [1 30 300 1000 0]; sys = tf(num, den);
% if you are using the System Identiﬁcation Toolbox instead of the Control System
Tooolbox: sys = idtf(num, den);
Now, we can get our step response from the step function, and plot it for time from 1
to 10 seconds:
T = 1:0.001:10; step(sys, T);

8.6 Frequency Response
The Frequency Response is similar to the Transfer function, except that it is the relationship between the system output and input in the complex Fourier Domain, not the
Laplace domain. We can obtain the frequency response from the transfer function, by using
the following change of variables:
s = jω
Frequency Response
The frequency response of a system is the relationship of the system's output to its
input, represented in the Fourier Domain.

Figure 22

68

Frequency Response
Because the frequency response and the transfer function are so closely related, typically
only one is ever calculated, and the other is gained by simple variable substitution. However, despite the close relationship between the two representations, they are both useful
individually, and are each used for diﬀerent purposes.

69

9 Sampled Data Systems
9.1 Ideal Sampler
In this chapter, we are going to introduce the ideal sampler and the Star Transform.
First, we need to introduce (or review) the Geometric Series inﬁnite sum. The results of
this sum will be very useful in calculating the Star Transform, later.
Consider a sampler device that operates as follows: every T seconds, the sampler reads the
current value of the input signal at that exact moment. The sampler then holds that value
on the output for T seconds, before taking the next sample. We have a generic input to this
system, f(t), and our sampled output will be denoted f*(t). We can then show the following
relationship between the two signals:
(

)

(

)

(

)

f ∗ (t) = f (0) u(t − 0) − u(t − T ) + f (T ) u(t − T ) − u(t − 2T ) +· · ·+ f (nT ) u(t − nT ) − u(t − (n + 1)T ) +·
Note that the value of f * at time t = 1.5 T is the same as at time t = T. This relationship
works for any fractional value.
Taking the Laplace Transform of this inﬁnite sequence will yield us with a special result
called the Star Transform. The Star Transform is also occasionally called the ”Starred
Transform” in some texts.

9.2 Geometric Series
w:Geometric progression1
Before we talk about the Star Transform or even the Z-Transform, it is useful for us to
review the mathematical background behind solving inﬁnite series. Speciﬁcally, because of
the nature of these transforms, we are going to look at methods to solve for the sum of a
geometric series.
A geometic series is a sum of values with increasing exponents, as such:
n
∑

ark = ar0 + ar1 + ar2 + ar3 + · · · + arn

k=0

1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric%20progression

71

Sampled Data Systems
In the equation above, notice that each term in the series has a coeﬃcient value, a. We can
optionally factor out this coeﬃcient, if the resulting equation is easier to work with:

a

n
∑

(

rk = a r0 + r1 + r2 + r3 + · · · + rn

)

k=0

Once we have an inﬁnite series in either of these formats, we can conveniently solve for the
total sum of this series using the following equation:
n
∑

a

rk = a

k=0

1 − rn+1
1−r

Let's say that we start our series oﬀ at a number that isn't zero. Let's say for instance that
we start our series oﬀ at n = 1 or n = 100. Let's see:
n
∑

ark = arm + arm+1 + arm+2 + arm+3 + · · · + arn

k=m

We can generalize the sum to this series as follows:
[Geometric Series]
n
∑
k=m

ark =

a(rm − rn+1 )
1−r

With that result out of the way, now we need to worry about making this series converge.
In the above sum, we know that n is approaching inﬁnity (because this is an inﬁnite sum).
Therefore, any term that contains the variable n is a matter of worry when we are trying to
make this series converge. If we examine the above equation, we see that there is one term
in the entire result with an n in it, and from that, we can set a fundamental inequality to
govern the geometric series.
rn+1 < ∞
To satisfy this equation, we must satisfy the following condition:
[Geometric convergence condition]
r≤1

Therefore, we come to the ﬁnal result: The geometric series converges if and only if
the value of r is less than one.

72

The Star Transform

9.3 The Star Transform
The Star Transform is deﬁned as such:
[Star Transform]
F ∗ (s) = L∗ [f (t)] =

∞
∑

f (kT )e−skT

k=0

w:Star transform2
The Star Transform depends on the sampling time T and is diﬀerent for a single signal
depending on the frequency at which the signal is sampled. Since the Star Transform is
deﬁned as an inﬁnite series, it is important to note that some inputs to the Star Transform
will not converge, and therefore some functions do not have a valid Star Transform. Also, it
is important to note that the Star Transform may only be valid under a particular region
of convergence. We will cover this topic more when we discuss the Z-transform.

9.3.1 Star ↔ Laplace
For more information about residues, see:
Complex Analysis/Residue Theorya
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Complex%20Analysis%2FResidue%20Theory

The Laplace Transform and the Star Transform are clearly related, because we obtained
the Star Transform by using the Laplace Transform on a time-domain signal. However,
the method to convert between the two results can be a slightly diﬃcult one. To ﬁnd the
Star Transform of a Laplace function, we must take the residues of the Laplace equation,
as such:
X ∗ (s) =

∑[

residues of X(λ)

1

]

1 − e−T (s−λ) at poles of E(λ)

This math is advanced for most readers, so we can also use an alternate method, as follows:
∞
x(0)
1 ∑
X(s + jmωs ) +
X (s) =
T n=−∞
2
∗

Neither one of these methods are particularly easy, however, and therefore we will not discuss
the relationship between the Laplace transform and the Star Transform any more than is
absolutely necessary in this book. Suﬃce it to say, however, that the Laplace transform
and the Star Transform are related mathematically.

2

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star%20transform

73

Sampled Data Systems

9.3.2 Star + Laplace
In some systems, we may have components that are both continuous and discrete in nature.
For instance, if our feedback loop consists of an Analog-To-Digital converter, followed by
a computer (for processing), and then a Digital-To-Analog converter. In this case, the
computer is acting on a digital signal, but the rest of the system is acting on continuous
signals. Star transforms can interact with Laplace transforms in some of the following ways:
Given:
Y (s) = X ∗ (s)H(s) Then:
Y ∗ (s) = X ∗ (s)H ∗ (s)
Given:
Y (s) = X(s)H(s) Then:
∗

Y ∗ (s) = XH (s)
Y ∗ (s) ̸= X ∗ (s)H ∗ (s)
∗

Where XH (s) is the Star Transform of the product of X(s)H(s).

9.3.3 Convergence of the Star Transform
The Star Transform is deﬁned as being an inﬁnite series, so it is critically important that
the series converge (not reach inﬁnity), or else the result will be nonsensical. Since the
Star Transform is a geometic series (for many input signals), we can use geometric series
analysis to show whether the series converges, and even under what particular conditions
the series converges. The restrictions on the star transform that allow it to converge are
known as the region of convergence (ROC) of the transform. Typically a transform must
be accompanied by the explicit mention of the ROC.

9.4 The Z-Transform
w:Z-transform3
Let us say now that we have a discrete data set that is sampled at regular intervals. We
can call this set x[n]:
x[n] = [ x[0] x[1] x[2] x[3] x[4] ... ]

3

74

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-transform

The Z-Transform

This is also known as the Bilateral Z-Transform. We will only discuss this version of
the transform in this book
we can utilize a special transform, called the Z-transform, to make dealing with this set
more easy:
[Z Transform]
X(z) = Z {x[n]} =

∞
∑

x[n]z −n

n=−∞

Z-Transform properties, and a table of common transforms can be found in:
the Appendixa .
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FTransforms%20Appendix

Like the Star Transform the Z Transform is deﬁned as an inﬁnite series and therefore we
need to worry about convergence. In fact, there are a number of instances that have identical
Z-Transforms, but diﬀerent regions of convergence (ROC). Therefore, when talking about
the Z transform, you must include the ROC, or you are missing valuable information.

9.4.1 Z Transfer Functions
Like the Laplace Transform, in the Z-domain we can use the input-output relationship of
the system to deﬁne a transfer function.

Figure 23

The transfer function in the Z domain operates exactly the same as the transfer function
in the S Domain:
H(z) =

Y (z)
X(z)

Z{h[n]} = H(z)

75

Sampled Data Systems
Similarly, the value h[n] which represents the response of the digital system is known as the
impulse response of the system. It is important to note, however, that the deﬁnition of
an ”impulse” is diﬀerent in the analog and digital domains.

9.4.2 Inverse Z Transform
The inverse Z Transform is deﬁned by the following path integral:
[Inverse Z Transform]
x[n] = Z −1 {X(z)} =

1
2πj

I

X(z)z n−1 dz
C

Where C is a counterclockwise closed path encircling the origin and entirely in the region
of convergence (ROC). The contour or path, C, must encircle all of the poles of X(z).
There is more information about complex integrals in the book Engineering Analysisa .
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis

This math is relatively advanced compared to some other material in this book, and therefore little or no further attention will be paid to solving the inverse Z-Transform in this
manner. Z transform pairs are heavily tabulated in reference texts, so many readers can
consider that to be the primary method of solving for inverse Z transforms. There are a
number of Z-transform pairs available in table form in The Appendix4 .

9.4.3 Final Value Theorem
Like the Laplace Transform, the Z Transform also has an associated ﬁnal value theorem:
[Final Value Theorem (Z)]
lim x[n] = lim (z − 1)X(z)

n→∞

z→1

This equation can be used to ﬁnd the steady-state response of a system, and also to calculate
the steady-state error of the system.

9.5 Star ↔ Z
The Z transform is related to the Star transform though the following change of variables:
z = esT

4

76

Chapter 7 on page 49

Star ↔ Z
Notice that in the Z domain, we don't maintain any information on the sampling period, so
converting to the Z domain from a Star Transformed signal loses that information. When
converting back to the star domain however, the value for T can be re-insterted into the
equation, if it is still available.
Also of some importance is the fact that the Z transform is bilinear, while the Star Transform
is unilinear. This means that we can only convert between the two transforms if the sampled
signal is zero for all values of n < 0.
Because the two transforms are so closely related, it can be said that the Z transform is
simply a notational convenience for the Star Transform. With that said, this book could
easily use the Star Transform for all problems, and ignore the added burden of Z transform notation entirely. A common example of this is Richard Hamming's book ”Numerical
Methods for Scientists and Engineers” which uses the Fourier Transform for all problems,
considering the Laplace, Star, and Z-Transforms to be merely notational conveniences.
However, the Control Systems wikibook is under the impression that the correct utilization
of diﬀerent transforms can make problems more easy to solve, and we will therefore use a
multi-transform approach.

9.5.1 Z plane
Note:
The lower-case z is the name of the variable, and the upper-case Z is the name of the
Transform and the plane.
z is a complex variable with a real part and an imaginary part. In other words, we can
deﬁne z as such:
z = Re(z) + j Im(z)
Since z can be broken down into two independent components, it often makes sense to graph
the variable z on the Z-plane. In the Z-plane, the horizontal axis represents the real part
of z, and the vertical axis represents the magnitude of the imaginary part of z.
Notice also that if we deﬁne z in terms of the star-transform relation:
z = esT
we can separate out s into real and imaginary parts:
s = σ + jω
We can plug this into our equation for z:
z = e(σ+jω)T = eσT ejωT

77

Sampled Data Systems
Through Euler's formula, we can separate out the complex exponential as such:
z = eσT (cos(ωT ) + j sin(ωT ))
If we deﬁne two new variables, M and φ:
M = eσT
ϕ = ωT
We can write z in terms of M and φ. Notice that it is Euler's equation:
z = M cos(ϕ) + jM sin(ϕ)
Which is clearly a polar representation of z, with the magnitude of the polar function (M)
based on the real-part of s, and the angle of the polar function (φ) is based on the imaginary
part of s.

9.5.2 Region of Convergence
To best teach the region of convergance (ROC) for the Z-transform, we will do a quick
example.
We have the following discrete series or a decaying exponential:
x[n] = e−2n u[n]
Now, we can plug this function into the Z transform equation:
X(z) = Z[x[n]] =

∑∞

n=−∞ e

−2n u[n]z −n

Note that we can remove the unit step function, and change the limits of the sum:
X(z) =

∑∞

n=0 e

−2n z −n

This is because the series is 0 for all time less than n → 0. If we try to combine the n
terms, we get the following result:
X(z) =

∑∞

2 −n
n=0 (e z)

Once we have our series in this term, we can break this down to look like our geometric
series:
a=1
r = (e2 z)−1
And ﬁnally, we can ﬁnd our ﬁnal value, using the geometric series formula:

78

Star ↔ Z

a

∑n

k=0 r

2 −1 n+1
k = a 1−rn+1 = 1 1−((e z) )
1−r
1−(e2 z)−1

Again, we know that to make this series converge, we need to make the r value less
than 1:
|(e2 z)−1 | = e21z ≤ 1
|e2 z| ≥ 1
And ﬁnally we obtain the region of convergance for this Z-transform:
|z| ≥ e12

z and s are complex variables, and therefore we need to take the magnitude in our
ROC calculations. The ”Absolute Value symbols” are actually the ”magnitude
calculation”, and is deﬁned as such:
x = A + jB

|x| =

√

A2 + B 2

9.5.3 Laplace ↔ Z
There are no easy, direct ways to convert between the Laplace transform and the Z transform directly. Nearly all methods of conversions reproduce some aspects of the original
equation faithfully, and incorrectly reproduce other aspects. For some of the main mapping
techniques between the two, see the Z Transform Mappings Appendix5 .
However, there are some topics that we need to discuss. First and foremost, conversions
between the Laplace domain and the Z domain are not linear, this leads to some of the
following problems:
1. L[G(z)H(z)] ̸= G(s)H(s)
2. Z[G(s)H(s)] ̸= G(z)H(z)
This means that when we combine two functions in one domain multiplicatively, we must
ﬁnd a combined transform in the other domain. Here is how we denote this combined
transform:
Z[G(s)H(s)] = GH(z)

5

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FZ%20Transform%20Mappings

79

Sampled Data Systems
Notice that we use a horizontal bar over top of the multiplied functions, to denote that
we took the transform of the product, not of the individual pieces. However, if we have a
system that incorporates a sampler, we can show a simple result. If we have the following
format:
Y (s) = X ∗ (s)H(s)
Then we can put everything in terms of the Star Transform:
Y ∗ (s) = X ∗ (s)H ∗ (s)
and once we are in the star domain, we can do a direct change of variables to reach the Z
domain:
Y ∗ (s) = X ∗ (s)H ∗ (s) → Y (z) = X(z)H(z)
Note that we can only make this equivalence relationship if the system incorporates an ideal
sampler, and therefore one of the multiplicative terms is in the star domain.

9.5.4 Example
Let's say that we have the following equation in the Laplace domain:
Y (s) = A∗ (s)B(s) + C(s)D(s)
And because we have a discrete sampler in the system, we want to analyze it in the Z
domain. We can break up this equation into two separate terms, and transform each:
Z[A∗ (s)B(s)] → Z[A∗ (s)B ∗ (s)] = A(z)B(z)
And
Z[C(s)D(s)] = CD(z)
And when we add them together, we get our result:
Y (z) = A(z)B(z) + CD(z)

9.6 Z ↔ Fourier
By substituting variables, we can relate the Star transform to the Fourier Transform as
well:
esT = ejω

e(σ+jω)T = ejω

80

Reconstruction
If we assume that T = 1, we can relate the two equations together by setting the real part
of s to zero. Notice that the relationship between the Laplace and Fourier transforms is
mirrored here, where the Fourier transform is the Laplace transform with no real-part to
the transform variable.
There are a number of discrete-time variants to the Fourier transform as well, which are
not discussed in this book. For more information about these variants, see Digital Signal
Processing6 .

9.7 Reconstruction
Some of the easiest reconstruction circuits are called ”Holding circuits”. Once a signal has
been transformed using the Star Transform (passed through an ideal sampler), the signal
must be ”reconstructed” using one of these hold systems (or an equivalent) before it can be
analyzed in a Laplace-domain system.
If we have a sampled signal denoted by the Star Transform X ∗ (s), we want to
reconstruct that signal into a continuous-time waveform, so that we can manipulate it
using Laplace-transform techniques.
Let's say that we have the sampled input signal, a reconstruction circuit denoted G(s), and
an output denoted with the Laplace-transform variable Y(s). We can show the relationship
as follows:
Y (s) = X ∗ (s)G(s)
Reconstruction circuits then, are physical devices that we can use to convert a digital,
sampled signal into a continuous-time domain, so that we can take the Laplace transform
of the output signal.

6

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital%20Signal%20Processing

81

Sampled Data Systems

9.7.1 Zero order Hold

Figure 24

Zero-Order Hold impulse response

A zero-order hold circuit is a circuit that essentially inverts the sampling process: The
value of the sampled signal at time t is held on the output for T time. The output waveform
of a zero-order hold circuit therefore looks like a staircase approximation to the original
waveform.
The transfer function for a zero-order hold circuit, in the Laplace domain, is written as
such:
[Zero Order Hold]

Gh0 =

1 − e−T s
s

The Zero-order hold is the simplest reconstruction circuit, and (like the rest of the circuits
on this page) assumes zero processing delay in converting between digital to analog.

82

Reconstruction

Figure 25
hold (red)

A continuous input signal (gray) and the sampled signal with a zero-order

83

Sampled Data Systems

9.7.2 First Order Hold

Figure 26

Impulse response of a ﬁrst-order hold.

The zero-order hold creates a step output waveform, but this isn't always the best way to
reconstruct the circuit. Instead, the First-Order Hold circuit takes the derivative of the
waveform at the time t, and uses that derivative to make a guess as to where the output
waveform is going to be at time (t + T). The ﬁrst-order hold circuit then ”draws a line”
from the current position to the expected future position, as the output of the waveform.
[First Order Hold]
[

1 + T s 1 − e−T s
Gh1 =
T
s

]2

Keep in mind, however, that the next value of the signal will probably not be the same as
the expected value of the next data point, and therefore the ﬁrst-order hold may have a
number of discontinuities.

84

Reconstruction

Figure 27

An input signal (grey) and the ﬁrst-order hold circuit output (red)

9.7.3 Fractional Order Hold
The Zero-Order hold outputs the current value onto the output, and keeps it level throughout the entire bit time. The ﬁrst-order hold uses the function derivative to predict the next
value, and produces a series of ramp outputs to produce a ﬂuctuating waveform. Sometimes however, neither of these solutions are desired, and therefore we have a compromise:
Fractional-Order Hold. Fractional order hold acts like a mixture of the other two holding
circuits, and takes a fractional number k as an argument. Notice that k must be between 0
and 1 for this circuit to work correctly.
[Fractional Order Hold]
Ghk = (1 − ke−T s )

1 − e−T s
k
+ 2 (1 − e−T s )2
s
Ts

This circuit is more complicated than either of the other hold circuits, but sometimes added
complexity is worth it if we get better performance from our reconstruction circuit.

85

Sampled Data Systems

9.7.4 Other Reconstruction Circuits

Figure 28

Impulse response to a linear-approximation circuit.

Another type of circuit that can be used is a linear approximation circuit.

86

Further reading

Figure 29
circuit

An input signal (grey) and the output signal through a linear approximation

9.8 Further reading
• Hamming, Richard. ”Numerical Methods for Scientists and Engineers”
0486652416
• Digital Signal Processing/Z Transform7
• Complex Analysis/Residue Theory8
• Analog and Digital Conversion9

7
8
9

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital%20Signal%20Processing%2FZ%20Transform
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Complex%20Analysis%2FResidue%20Theory
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Analog%20and%20Digital%20Conversion

87

10 System Delays
10.1 Delays
A system can be built with an inherent delay. Delays are units that cause a time-shift in
the input signal, but that don't aﬀect the signal characteristics. An ideal delay is a delay
system that doesn't aﬀect the signal characteristics at all, and that delays the signal for
an exact amount of time. Some delays, like processing delays or transmission delays, are
unintentional. Other delays however, such as synchronization delays, are an integral part
of a system. This chapter will talk about how delays are utilized and represented in the
Laplace Domain. Once we represent a delay in the Laplace domain, it is an easy matter,
through change of variables, to express delays in other domains.

10.1.1 Ideal Delays
An ideal delay causes the input function to be shifted forward in time by a certain speciﬁed
amount of time. Systems with an ideal delay cause the system output to be delayed by a
ﬁnite, predetermined amount of time.

Figure 30

10.2 Time Shifts
Let's say that we have a function in time that is time-shifted by a certain constant time
period T. For convenience, we will denote this function as x(t - T). Now, we can show that
the Laplace transform of x(t - T) is the following:
L{x(t − T )} ⇔ e−sT X(s)
What this demonstrates is that time-shifts in the time-domain become exponentials in the
complex Laplace domain.

89

System Delays

10.2.1 Shifts in the Z-Domain
Since we know the following general relationship between the Z Transform and the Star
Transform:
z ⇔ esT
We can show what a time shift in a discrete time domain becomes in the Z domain:
x((n − ns ) · T ) ≡ x[n − ns ] ⇔ z −ns X(z)

10.3 Delays and Stability
A time-shift in the time domain becomes an exponential increase in the Laplace domain.
This would seem to show that a time shift can have an eﬀect on the stability of a system,
and occasionally can cause a system to become unstable. We deﬁne a new parameter called
the time margin as the amount of time that we can shift an input function before the
system becomes unstable. If the system can survive any arbitrary time shift without going
unstable, we say that the time margin of the system is inﬁnite.

10.4 Delay Margin
When speaking of sinusoidal signals, it doesn't make sense to talk about ”time shifts”, so
instead we talk about ”phase shifts”. Therefore, it is also common to refer to the time margin
as the phase margin of the system. The phase margin denotes the amount of phase shift
that we can apply to the system input before the system goes unstable.
We denote the phase margin for a system with a lowercase Greek letter φ (phi). Phase
margin is deﬁned as such for a second-order system:
[Delay Margin]
[

ϕm = tan

−1

2ζ
√
4
( 4ζ + 1 − 2ζ 2 )1/2

]

Oftentimes, the phase margin is approximated by the following relationship:
[Delay Margin (approx)]
ϕm ≈ 100ζ
The Greek letter zeta (ζ) is a quantity called the damping ratio, and we discuss this
quantity in more detail in the next chapter.

90

Transform-Domain Delays

10.5 Transform-Domain Delays
The ordinary Z-Transform does not account for a system which experiences an arbitrary
time delay, or a processing delay. The Z-Transform can, however, be modiﬁed to account for
an arbitrary delay. This new version of the Z-transform is frequently called the Modiﬁed
Z-Transform, although in some literature (notably in Wikipedia), it is known as the
Advanced Z-Transform.

10.5.1 Delayed Star Transform
To demonstrate the concept of an ideal delay, we will show how the star transform responds
to a time-shifted input with a speciﬁed delay of time T. The function :X ∗ (s, ∆) is the
delayed star transform with a delay parameter ∆. The delayed star transform is deﬁned in
terms of the star transform as such:
[Delayed Star Transform]
X ∗ (s, ∆) = L∗ {x(t − ∆)} = X(s)e−∆T s
As we can see, in the star transform, a time-delayed signal is multiplied by a decaying
exponential value in the transform domain.

10.5.2 Delayed Z-Transform
Since we know that the Star Transform is related to the Z Transform through the following
change of variables:
z = e−sT
We can interpret the above result to show how the Z Transform responds to a delay:
Z(x[t − T ]) = X(z)z −T
This result is expected.
Now that we know how the Z transform responds to time shifts, it is often useful to generalize
this behavior into a form known as the Delayed Z-Transform. The Delayed Z-Transform
is a function of two variables, z and ∆, and is deﬁned as such:
{

X(z, ∆) = Z {x(t − ∆)} = Z X(s)e−∆T s

}

And ﬁnally:
[Delayed Z Transform]

91

System Delays

Z(x[n], ∆) = X(z, ∆) =

∞
∑

x[n − ∆]z −n

n=−∞

10.6 Modiﬁed Z-Transform
w:Advanced Z-transform1
The Delayed Z-Transform has some uses, but mathematicians and engineers have decided
that a more useful version of the transform was needed. The new version of the Z-Transform,
which is similar to the Delayed Z-transform with a change of variables, is known as the
Modiﬁed Z-Transform. The Modiﬁed Z-Transform is deﬁned in terms of the delayed Z
transform as follows:
{

X(z, m) = X(z, ∆) ∆→1−m = Z X(s)e−∆T s

}
∆→1−m

And it is deﬁned explicitly:
[Modiﬁed Z Transform]
X(z, m) = Z(x[n], m) =

∞
∑

x[n + m − 1]z −n

n=−∞

1

92

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced%20Z-transform

11 Poles and Zeros
11.1 Poles and Zeros
Poles and Zeros of a transfer function are the frequencies for which the value of the denominator and numerator of transfer function becomes zero respectively. The values of the
poles and the zeros of a system determine whether the system is stable, and how well the
system performs. Control systems, in the most simple sense, can be designed simply by
assigning speciﬁc values to the poles and zeros of the system.
Physically realizable control systems must have a number of poles greater than the number
of zeros. Systems that satisfy this relationship are called Proper. We will elaborate on
this below.

11.2 Time-Domain Relationships
Let's say that we have a transfer function with 3 poles:
H(s) =

a
(s − l)(s − m)(s − n)

The poles are located at s = l, m, n. Now, we can use partial fraction expansion to separate
out the transfer function:
H(s) =

a
A
B
C
=
+
+
(s − l)(s − m)(s − n) s − l s − m s − n

Using the inverse transform on each of these component fractions (looking up the transforms
in our table), we get the following:
h(t) = Aelt u(t) + Bemt u(t) + Cent u(t)
But, since s is a complex variable, l m and n can all potentially be complex numbers, with
a real part (σ) and an imaginary part (jω). If we just look at the ﬁrst term:
Aelt u(t) = Ae(σl +jωl )t u(t) = Aeσl t ejωl t u(t)
Using Euler's Equation1 on the imaginary exponent, we get:
1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s%20identity

93

Poles and Zeros

Aeσl t [cos(ωl t) + j sin(ωl t)]u(t)
If a complex pole is present it is always accomponied by another pole that is its complex
conjugate. The imaginary parts of their time domain representations thus cancel and we
are left with 2 of the same real parts. Assuming that the complex conjugate pole of the
ﬁrst term is present, we can take 2 times the real part of this equation and we are left with
our ﬁnal result:
2Aeσl t cos(ωl t)u(t)
We can see from this equation that every pole will have an exponential part, and a sinusoidal
part to its response. We can also go about constructing some rules:
1. if σ l = 0, the response of the pole is a perfect sinusoid (an oscillator)
2. if ω l = 0, the response of the pole is a perfect exponential.
3. if σ l < 0, the exponential part of the response will decay towards zero.
4. if σ l > 0, the exponential part of the response will rise towards inﬁnity.
From the last two rules, we can see that all poles of the system must have negative real
parts, and therefore they must all have the form (s + l) for the system to be stable. We
will discuss stability in later chapters.

11.3 What are Poles and Zeros
Let's say we have a transfer function deﬁned as a ratio of two polynomials:
H(s) =

N (s)
D(s)

Where N(s) and D(s) are simple polynomials. Zeros are the roots of N(s) (the numerator
of the transfer function) obtained by setting N(s) = 0 and solving for s.
The polynomial order of a function is the value of the highest exponent in the polynomial.
Poles are the roots of D(s) (the denominator of the transfer function), obtained by setting
D(s) = 0 and solving for s. Because of our restriction above, that a transfer function must
not have more zeros than poles, we can state that the polynomial order of D(s) must be
greater than or equal to the polynomial order of N(s).

94

Eﬀects of Poles and Zeros

11.3.1 Example
Consider the transfer function:
H(s) = s2s+2
+0.25
We deﬁne N(s) and D(s) to be the numerator and denominator polynomials, as such:
N (s) = s + 2
D(s) = s2 + 0.25
We set N(s) to zero, and solve for s:
N (s) = s + 2 = 0 → s = −2
So we have a zero at s → -2. Now, we set D(s) to zero, and solve for s to obtain the
poles of the equation:
√
√
D(s) = s2 + 0.25 = 0 → s = +i 0.25, −i 0.25
And simplifying this gives us poles at: -i/2 , +i/2. Remember, s is a complex variable,
and it can therefore take imaginary and real values.

11.4 Eﬀects of Poles and Zeros
As s approaches a zero, the numerator of the transfer function (and therefore the transfer
function itself) approaches the value 0. When s approaches a pole, the denominator of the
transfer function approaches zero, and the value of the transfer function approaches inﬁnity.
An output value of inﬁnity should raise an alarm bell for people who are familiar with BIBO
stability. We will discuss this later.
As we have seen above, the locations of the poles, and the values of the real and imaginary
parts of the pole determine the response of the system. Real parts correspond to exponentials, and imaginary parts correspond to sinusoidal values. Addition of poles to the transfer
function has the eﬀect of pulling the root locus to the right, making the system less stable.
Addition of zeros to the transfer function has the eﬀect of pulling the root locus to the left,
making the system more stable.

11.5 Second-Order Systems
The canonical form for a second order system is as follows:
[Second-order transfer function]

H(s) =

Kω 2
s2 + 2ζωs + ω 2

Where K is the system gain, ζ is called the damping ratio of the function, and ω is
called the natural frequency of the system. ζ and ω, if exactly known for a second order

95

Poles and Zeros
system, the time responses can be easily plotted and stability can easily be checked. More
information on second order systems can be found here2 .

11.5.1 Damping Ratio
The damping ratio of a second-order system, denoted with the Greek letter zeta (ζ), is
a real number that deﬁnes the damping properties of the system. More damping has the
eﬀect of less percent overshoot, and slower settling time. Damping is the inherent ability
of the system to oppose the oscillatory nature of the system's transient response. Larger
values of damping coeﬃcient or damping factor produces transient responses with lesser
oscillatory nature.

11.5.2 Natural Frequency
The natural frequency is occasionally written with a subscript:
ω → ωn
We will omit the subscript when it is clear that we are talking about the natural frequency,
but we will include the subscript when we are using other values for the variable ω. Also,
ω = ωn when ζ = 0.

11.6 Higher-Order Systems

2

96

http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Second_Order_Systems

12 State-Space Equations
12.1 Time-Domain Approach
The ”Classical” method of controls (what we have been studying so far) has been based
mostly in the transform domain. When we want to control the system in general we use the
Laplace transform (Z-Transform for digital systems) to represent the system, and when we
want to examine the frequency characteristics of a system, we use the Fourier Transform.
The question arises, why do we do this?
Let's look at a basic second-order Laplace Transform transfer function:
Y (s)
1+s
= G(s) =
X(s)
1 + 2s + 5s2
And we can decompose this equation in terms of the system inputs and outputs:
(1 + 2s + 5s2 )Y (s) = (1 + s)X(s)
Now, when we take the inverse Laplace transform of our equation, we can see that:

y(t) + 2

dy(t)
d2 y(t)
dx(t)
+5
= x(t) +
dt
dt2
dt

The Laplace transform is transforming the fact that we are dealing with second-order differential equations. The Laplace transform moves a system out of the time-domain into the
complex frequency domain, to study and manipulate our systems as algebraic polynomials
instead of linear ODEs. Given the complexity of diﬀerential equations, why would we ever
want to work in the time domain?
It turns out that to decompose our higher-order diﬀerential equations into multiple ﬁrstorder equations, one can ﬁnd a new method for easily manipulating the system without
having to use integral transforms. The solution to this problem is state variables. By
taking our multiple ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equations, and analyzing them in vector form,
we can not only do the same things we were doing in the time domain using simple matrix
algebra, but now we can easily account for systems with multiple inputs and multiple outputs, without adding much unnecessary complexity. This demonstrates why the ”modern”
state-space approach to controls has become popular.

97

State-Space Equations

12.2 State-Space
w:State space (controls)1
In a state space system, the internal state of the system is explicitly accounted for by
an equation known as the state equation. The system output is given in terms of a
combination of the current system state, and the current system input, through the output
equation. These two equations form a system of equations known collectively as statespace equations. The state-space is the vector space that consists of all the possible
internal states of the system.
For a system to be modeled using the state-space method, the system must meet this
requirement:
1. The system must be ”lumped”
”Lumped” in this context, means that we can ﬁnd a ﬁnite-dimensional state-space vector
which fully characterises all such internal states of the system.
This text mostly considers linear state space systems, where the state and output equations
satisfy the superposition principle and the state space is linear. However, the state-space
approach is equally valid for nonlinear systems although some speciﬁc methods are not
applicable to nonlinear systems.
State
Central to the state-space notation is the idea of a state. A state of a system is the
current value of internal elements of the system, that change separately (but not completely
unrelated) to the output of the system. In essence, the state of a system is an explicit account
of the values of the internal system components. Here are some examples:
Consider an electric circuit with both an input and an output terminal. This circuit
may contain any number of inductors and capacitors. The state variables may represent
the magnetic and electric ﬁelds of the inductors and capacitors, respectively.
Consider a spring-mass-dashpot system. The state variables may represent the compression of the spring, or the acceleration at the dashpot.
Consider a chemical reaction where certain reagents are poured into a mixing container,
and the output is the amount of the chemical product produced over time. The state
variables may represent the amounts of un-reacted chemicals in the container, or other
properties such as the quantity of thermal energy in the container (that can serve to
facilitate the reaction).

1

98

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State%20space%20%28controls%29

State Variables

12.3 State Variables
When modeling a system using a state-space equation, we ﬁrst need to deﬁne three vectors:
Input variables
A SISO (Single Input Single Output) system will only have a single input value, but a
MIMO system may have multiple inputs. We need to deﬁne all the inputs to the system,
and we need to arrange them into a vector.
Output variables
This is the system output value, and in the case of MIMO systems, we may have several.
Output variables should be independent of one another, and only dependent on a linear
combination of the input vector and the state vector.
State Variables
The state variables represent values from inside the system, that can change over time.
In an electric circuit, for instance, the node voltages or the mesh currents can be state
variables. In a mechanical system, the forces applied by springs, gravity, and dashpots can
be state variables.
We denote the input variables with u, the output variables with y, and the state variables
with x. In essence, we have the following relationship:
y = f (x, u)
Where f(x, u) is our system. Also, the state variables can change with respect to the current
state and the system input:
x′ = g(x, u)
Where x' is the rate of change of the state variables. We will deﬁne f(u, x) and g(u, x) in
the next chapter.

12.4 Multi-Input, Multi-Output
In the Laplace domain, if we want to account for systems with multiple inputs and multiple
outputs, we are going to need to rely on the principle of superposition to create a system
of simultaneous Laplace equations for each output and each input. For such systems,
the classical approach not only doesn't simplify the situation, but because the systems of
equations need to be transformed into the frequency domain ﬁrst, manipulated, and then
transformed back into the time domain, they can actually be more diﬃcult to work with.
However, the Laplace domain technique can be combined with the State-Space techniques
discussed in the next few chapters to bring out the best features of both techniques. We
will discuss MIMO systems in the MIMO Systems Chapter2 .
2

Chapter 17 on page 141

99

State-Space Equations

12.5 State-Space Equations
In a state-space system representation, we have a system of two equations: an equation for
determining the state of the system, and another equation for determining the output of
the system. We will use the variable y(t) as the output of the system, x(t) as the state of
the system, and u(t) as the input of the system. We use the notation x'(t) (note the prime)
for the ﬁrst derivative of the state vector of the system, as dependent on the current state
of the system and the current input. Symbolically, we say that there are transforms g and
h, that display this relationship:
x′ (t) = g[t0 , t, x(t), x(0), u(t)]

y(t) = h[t, x(t), u(t)]
Note:
If x'(t) and y(t) are not linear combinations of x(t) and u(t), the system is said to be
nonlinear. We will attempt to discuss non-linear systems in a later chapter.
The ﬁrst equation shows that the system state change is dependent on the previous system
state, the initial state of the system, the time, and the system inputs. The second equation
shows that the system output is dependent on the current system state, the system input,
and the current time.
If the system state change x'(t) and the system output y(t) are linear combinations of the
system state and input vectors, then we can say the systems are linear systems, and we can
rewrite them in matrix form:
[State Equation]
x′ = A(t)x(t) + B(t)u(t)
[Output Equation]
y(t) = C(t)x(t) + D(t)u(t)
If the systems themselves are time-invariant, we can re-write this as follows:
x′ = Ax(t) + Bu(t)

y(t) = Cx(t) + Du(t)
The State Equation shows the relationship between the system's current state and its
input, and the future state of the system. The Output Equation shows the relationship
between the system state and its input, and the output. These equations show that in a

100

State-Space Equations
given system, the current output is dependent on the current input and the current state.
The future state is also dependent on the current state and the current input.
It is important to note at this point that the state space equations of a particular system
are not unique, and there are an inﬁnite number of ways to represent these equations
by manipulating the A, B, C and D matrices using row operations. There are a number
of ”standard forms” for these matrices, however, that make certain computations easier.
Converting between these forms will require knowledge of linear algebra.
;State-Space Basis Theorem:Any system that can be described by a ﬁnite number of
nth order diﬀerential equations or nth order diﬀerence equations, or any system that
can be approximated by them, can be described using state-space equations. The general solutions to the state-space equations, therefore, are solutions to all such sets of
equations.

12.5.1 Matrices: A B C D
Our system has the form:
x′ (t) = g[t0 , t, x(t), x(0), u(t)]

y(t) = h[t, x(t), u(t)]
We've bolded several quantities to try and reinforce the fact that they can be vectors, not
just scalar quantities. If these systems are time-invariant, we can simplify them by removing
the time variables:
x′ (t) = g[x(t), x(0), u(t)]

y(t) = h[x(t), u(t)]
Now, if we take the partial derivatives of these functions with respect to the input and the
state vector at time t0 , we get our system matrices:
A = gx [x(0), x(0), u(0)]

B = gu [x(0), x(0), u(0)]

C = hx [x(0), u(0)]

D = hu [x(0), u(0)]

101

State-Space Equations
In our time-invariant state space equations, we write these matrices and their relationships
as:
x′ (t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)

y(t) = Cx(t) + Du(t)
We have four constant matrices: A, B, C, and D. We will explain these matrices below:
Matrix A
Matrix A is the system matrix, and relates how the current state aﬀects the state change
x'. If the state change is not dependent on the current state, A will be the zero matrix.
The exponential of the state matrix, eAt is called the state transition matrix, and is an
important function that we will describe below.
Matrix B
Matrix B is the control matrix, and determines how the system input aﬀects the state
change. If the state change is not dependent on the system input, then B will be the zero
matrix.
Matrix C
Matrix C is the output matrix, and determines the relationship between the system state
and the system output.
Matrix D
Matrix D is the feed-forward matrix, and allows for the system input to aﬀect the
system output directly. A basic feedback system like those we have previously considered
do not have a feed-forward element, and therefore for most of the systems we have already
considered, the D matrix is the zero matrix.

12.5.2 Matrix Dimensions
Because we are adding and multiplying multiple matrices and vectors together, we need to
be absolutely certain that the matrices have compatible dimensions, or else the equations
will be undeﬁned. For integer values p, q, and r, the dimensions of the system matrices and
vectors are deﬁned as follows:
Vectors

Matrices

• x : p×1
• x′ : p × 1
• u : q×1
• y : r×1

• A : p×p
• B : p×q
• C : r×p
• D : r×q

102

Obtaining the State-Space Equations

Matrix Dimensions:
A: p × p
B: p × q
C: r × p
D: r × q

If the matrix and vector dimensions do not agree with one another, the equations are invalid
and the results will be meaningless. Matrices and vectors must have compatible dimensions
or they cannot be combined using matrix operations.
For the rest of the book, we will be using the small template on the right as a reminder
about the matrix dimensions, so that we can keep a constant notation throughout the book.

12.5.3 Notational Shorthand
The state equations and the output equations of systems can be expressed in terms of
matrices A, B, C, and D. Because the form of these equations is always the same, we can
use an ordered quadruplet to denote a system. We can use the shorthand (A, B, C, D) to
denote a complete state-space representation. Also, because the state equation is very
important for our later analyis, we can write an ordered pair (A, B) to refer to the state
equation:
(A, B) → x′ = Ax + Bu
{

(A, B, C, D) →

x′ = Ax + Bu
y = Cx + Du

12.6 Obtaining the State-Space Equations
The beauty of state equations, is that they can be used to transparently describe systems
that are both continuous and discrete in nature. Some texts will diﬀerentiate notation
between discrete and continuous cases, but this text will not make such a distinction. Instead we will opt to use the generic coeﬃcient matrices A, B, C and D for both continuous
and discrete systems. Occasionally this book may employ the subscript C to denote a
continuous-time version of the matrix, and the subscript D to denote the discrete-time version of the same matrix. Other texts may use the letters F, H, and G for continuous systems
and Γ, and Θ for use in discrete systems. However, if we keep track of our time-domain
system, we don't need to worry about such notations.

103

State-Space Equations

12.6.1 From Diﬀerential Equations
Let's say that we have a general 3rd order diﬀerential equation in terms of input u(t) and
output y(t):
2
d3 y(t)
dy(t)
+ a2 d dty(t)
2 + a1 dt + a0 y(t) = u(t)
dt3

We can create the state variable vector x in the following manner:
x1 = y(t)
x2 = dy(t)
dt
2

x3 = d dty(t)
2
Which now leaves us with the following 3 ﬁrst-order equations:
x′1 = x2
x′2 = x3
3

x′3 = d dty(t)
3
Now, we can deﬁne the state vector x in terms of the individual x components, and we
can create the future state vector as well:








x1
x′1
  ′  ′
x = x2 , x = x2 
x3
x′3
And with that, we can assemble the state-space equations for the system:




 

0
1
0
0


 
0
1  x(t) + 0 u(t)
x′ =  0
−a0 −a1 −a2
1
[

]

y(t) = 1 0 0 x(t)
Granted, this is only a simple example, but the method should become apparent to
most readers.

12.6.2 From Transfer Functions
The method of obtaining the state-space equations from the Laplace domain transfer functions are very similar to the method of obtaining them from the time-domain diﬀerential
equations. We call the process of converting a system description from the Laplace domain
to the state-space domain realization. We will discuss realization in more detail in a later
chapter. In general, let's say that we have a transfer function of the form:

T (s) =

sm + am−1 sm−1 + · · · + a0
sn + bn−1 sn−1 + · · · + b0

We can write our A, B, C, and D matrices as follows:

104

State-Space Representation


0
 0

 .
A=
 ..

 0

−b
0

1
0
..
.

0
1
..
.

0
0
−b1 −b2

···
···
..
.

0
0
..
.

···
1
· · · −bn−1










0

 
0

B=
 .. 
.
[1

C = a0 a1 · · · am−1
D=0

]

This form of the equations is known as the controllable canonical form of the system
matrices, and we will discuss this later.
Notice that to perform this method, the denominator and numerator polynomials must be
monic, the coeﬃcients of the highest-order term must be 1. If the coeﬃcient of the highest
order term is not 1, you must divide your equation by that coeﬃcient to make it 1.

12.7 State-Space Representation
As an important note, remember that the state variables x are user-deﬁned and therefore
are arbitrary. There are any number of ways to deﬁne x for a particular problem, each of
which are going to lead to diﬀerent state space equations.
Note: There are an inﬁnite number of equivalent ways to represent a system using statespace equations. Some ways are better than others. Once these state-space equations
are obtained, they can be manipulated to take a particular form if needed.
Consider the previous continuous-time example. We can rewrite the equation in the form
]

[

d d2 y(t)
dy(t)
+ a2
+ a1 y(t) + a0 y(t) = u(t)
2
dt
dt
dt
We now deﬁne the state variables
x1 = y(t)
x2 =

dy(t)
dt

105

State-Space Equations

d2 y(t)
dy(t)
+ a2
+ a1 y(t)
2
dt
dt

x3 =
with ﬁrst-order derivatives

x′1 =

dy(t)
= x2
dt

2

d
x′2 = d dty(t)
= −a1 x1 − a2 x2 + x3 (suspected error here. Fails to account that : dt
[]. encap2
2

dy(t)
sulates : d dty(t)
2 + a2 dt + a1 y(t) ﬁve lines earlier.)

x′3 = −a0 y(t) + u(t)
The state-space equations for the system will then be given by




 

0
1
0
0


 
x′ = −a1 −a2 1 x(t) + 0 u(t)
−a0
0
0
1
[

]

y(t) = 1 0 0 x(t)
x may also be used in any number of variable transformations, as a matter of mathematical
convenience. However, the variables y and u correspond to physical signals, and may not
be arbitrarily selected, redeﬁned, or transformed as x can be.

12.7.1 Example: Dummy Variables
The altitude control of a particular manned aircraft can be given by:
θ′′ (t) = α + δ
Where α is the direction the aircraft is traveling in, θ is the direction the aircraft is
facing (the attitude), and δ is the angle of the ailerons (the control input from the pilot).
This equation is not in a proper format, so we need to produce some dummy-variables:
θ1 = θ
θ1′ = θ2
θ2′ = α + δ
This in turn will provide us with our state equation:
[ ]′

θ1
θ2

[

0 1
=
0 0

][ ]

[

0 0
θ1
+
1 1
θ2

][ ]

α
δ

As we can see from this equation, even though we have a valid state-equation, the
variables θ1 and θ2 don't necessarily correspond to any measurable physical event, but
are instead dummy variables constructed by the user to help deﬁne the system. Note,

106

Discretization

however, that the variables α and δ do correspond to physical values, and cannot be
changed.

12.8 Discretization
If we have a system (A, B, C, D) that is deﬁned in continuous time, we can discretize the
system so that an equivalent process can be performed using a digital computer. We can
use the deﬁnition of the derivative, as such:
x(t + T ) − x(t)
T →0
T

x′ (t) = lim

And substituting this into the state equation with some approximation (and ignoring the
limit for now) gives us:
lim

T →0

x(t + T ) − x(t)
= Ax(t) + Bu(t)
T

x(t + T ) = x(t) + Ax(t)T + Bu(t)T
x(t + T ) = (1 + AT )x(t) + (BT )u(t)
We are able to remove that limit because in a discrete system, the time interval between
samples is positive and non-negligible. By deﬁnition, a discrete system is only deﬁned at
certain time points, and not at all time points as the limit would have indicated. In a
discrete system, we are interested only in the value of the system at discrete points. If those
points are evenly spaced by every T seconds (the sampling time), then the samples of the
system occur at t = kT, where k is an integer. Substituting kT for t into our equation above
gives us:
x(kT + T ) = (1 + AT )x(kT ) + T Bu(kT )
Or, using the square-bracket shorthand that we've developed earlier, we can write:
x[k + 1] = (1 + AT )x[k] + T Bu[k]
In this form, the state-space system can be implemented quite easily into a digital computer
system using software, not complicated analog hardware. We will discuss this relationship
and digital systems more speciﬁcally in a later chapter.
We will write out the discrete-time state-space equations as:
x[n + 1] = Ad x[n] + Bd u[n]

107

State-Space Equations

y[n] = Cd x[n] + Dd u[n]

12.9 Note on Notations
The variable T is a common variable in control systems, especially when talking about the
beginning and end points of a continuous-time system, or when discussing the sampling
time of a digital system. However, another common use of the letter T is to signify the
transpose operation on a matrix. To alleviate this ambiguity, we will denote the transpose
of a matrix with a prime:
AT → A′
Where A' is the transpose of matrix A.
The prime notation is also frequently used to denote the time-derivative. Most of the
matrices that we will be talking about are time-invariant; there is no ambiguity because we
will never take the time derivative of a time-invariant matrix. However, for a time-variant
matrix we will use the following notations to distinguish between the time-derivative and
the transpose:
A(t)′ the transpose.
A′ (t) the time-derivative.
Note that certain variables which are time-variant are not written with the (t) postscript,
such as the variables x, y, and u. For these variables, the default behavior of the prime is
the time-derivative, such as in the state equation. If the transpose needs to be taken of
one of these vectors, the (t)' postﬁx will be added explicitly to correspond to our notation
above.
For instances where we need to use the Hermitian transpose, we will use the notation:
AH
This notation is common in other literature, and raises no obvious ambiguities here.

12.10 MATLAB Representation
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: ss
State-space systems can be represented in MATLAB using the 4 system matrices, A, B, C,
and D. We can create a system data structure using the ss function:
sys = ss(A, B, C, D);

108

MATLAB Representation
Systems created in this way can be manipulated in the same way that the transfer function
descriptions (described earlier) can be manipulated. To convert a transfer function to a
state-space representation, we can use the tf2ss function:
[A, B, C, D] = tf2ss(num, den);

And to perform the opposite operation, we can use the ss2tf function:
[num, den] = ss2tf(A, B, C, D);

he:‫תורתהבקרה‬/‫משתנימצב‬3

3

https://he.wikibooks.org/wiki/%D7%AA%D7%95%D7%A8%D7%AA%20%D7%94%D7%91%D7%A7%D7%A8%D7%
94%2F%D7%9E%D7%A9%D7%AA%D7%A0%D7%99%20%D7%9E%D7%A6%D7%91

109

13 Solutions for Linear Systems
13.1 State Equation Solutions
The solutions in this chapter are heavily rooted in prior knowledge of Ordinary Diﬀerential Equationsa . Readers should have a prior knowledge of that subject before reading
this chapter.
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ordinary%20Differential%20Equations

The state equation is a ﬁrst-order linear diﬀerential equation, or (more precisely) a system
of linear diﬀerential equations. Because this is a ﬁrst-order equation, we can use results
from Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations1 to ﬁnd a general solution to the equation in terms
of the state-variable x. Once the state equation has been solved for x, that solution can be
plugged into the output equation. The resulting equation will show the direct relationship
between the system input and the system output, without the need to account explicitly
for the internal state of the system. The sections in this chapter will discuss the solutions
to the state-space equations, starting with the easiest case (Time-invariant, no input), and
ending with the most diﬃcult case (Time-variant systems).

13.2 Solving for x(t) With Zero Input
Looking again at the state equation:
x′ = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
We can see that this equation is a ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equation, except that the variables
are vectors, and the coeﬃcients are matrices. However, because of the rules of matrix
calculus, these distinctions don't matter. We can ignore the input term (for now), and
rewrite this equation in the following form:
dx(t)
= Ax(t)
dt
And we can separate out the variables as such:

1

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ordinary%20Differential%20Equations

111

Solutions for Linear Systems

dx(t)
= Adt
x(t)
Integrating both sides, and raising both sides to a power of e, we obtain the result:
x(t) = eAt+C
Where C is a constant. We can assign D = eC to make the equation easier, but we also
know that D will then be the initial conditions of the system. This becomes obvious if we
plug the value zero into the variable t. The ﬁnal solution to this equation then is given as:
x(t) = eA(t−t0 ) x(t0 )
We call the matrix exponential eAt the state-transition matrix, and calculating it, while
diﬃcult at times, is crucial to analyzing and manipulating systems. We will talk more about
calculating the matrix exponential below.

13.3 Solving for x(t) With Non-Zero Input
If, however, our input is non-zero (as is generally the case with any interesting system), our
solution is a little bit more complicated. Notice that now that we have our input term in
the equation, we will no longer be able to separate the variables and integrate both sides
easily.
x′ (t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
We subtract to get the Ax(t) on the left side, and then we do something curious; we
premultiply both sides by the inverse state transition matrix:
e−At x′ (t) − e−At Ax(t) = e−At Bu(t)
The rationale for this last step may seem fuzzy at best, so we will illustrate the point with
an example:

13.3.1 Example
Take the derivative of the following with respect to time:
e−At x(t)
The product rule from diﬀerentiation reminds us that if we have two functions multiplied together:

112

State-Transition Matrix

f (t)g(t)
and we diﬀerentiate with respect to t, then the result is:
f (t)g ′ (t) + f ′ (t)g(t)
If we set our functions accordingly:
f (t) = e−At

f ′ (t) = −Ae−At

g(t) = x(t)

g ′ (t) = x′ (t)

Then the output result is:
e−At x′ (t) − e−At Ax(t)
If we look at this result, it is the same as from our equation above.
Using the result from our example, we can condense the left side of our equation into a
derivative:
d(e−At x(t))
= e−At Bu(t)
dt
Now we can integrate both sides, from the initial time (t0 ) to the current time (t), using a
dummy variable τ , we will get closer to our result. Finally, if we premultiply by eAt , we get
our ﬁnal result:
[General State Equation Solution]
x(t) = e

A(t−t0 )

∫ t

x(t0 ) +

eA(t−τ ) Bu(τ )dτ

t0

If we plug this solution into the output equation, we get:
[General Output Equation Solution]
y(t) = Ce

A(t−t0 )

∫ t

x(t0 ) + C

eA(t−τ ) Bu(τ )dτ + Du(t)

t0

This is the general Time-Invariant solution to the state space equations, with non-zero
input. These equations are important results, and students who are interested in a further
study of control systems would do well to memorize these equations.

13.4 State-Transition Matrix
More information about matrix exponentials can be found in:
Engineering Analysisa
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis

113

Solutions for Linear Systems
The state transition matrix, eAt , is an important part of the general state-space solutions
for the time-invariant cases listed above. Calculating this matrix exponential function is
one of the very ﬁrst things that should be done when analyzing a new system, and the
results of that calculation will tell important information about the system in question.
The matrix exponential can be calculated directly by using a Taylor-Series expansion:
eAt =

∞
∑
(At)n
n=0

n!

More information about diagonal matrices and Jordan-form matrices can be found
in:
Engineering Analysisa
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis

Also, we can attempt to diagonalize the matrix A into a diagonal matrix or a Jordan
Canonical matrix. The exponential of a diagonal matrix is simply the diagonal elements
individually raised to that exponential. The exponential of a Jordan canonical matrix
is slightly more complicated, but there is a useful pattern that can be exploited to ﬁnd
the solution quickly. Interested readers should read the relevant passages in Engineering
Analysis2 .
The state transition matrix, and matrix exponentials in general are very important tools in
control engineering.

13.4.1 Diagonal Matrices
If a matrix is diagonal, the state transition matrix can be calculated by raising each diagonal
entry of the matrix raised as a power of e.

13.4.2 Jordan Canonical Form
If the A matrix is in the Jordan Canonical form, then the matrix exponential can be
generated quickly using the following formula:


1 t
0 1

eJt = eλt 
 .. ..
. .
0 0

1 2
2! t

t
..
.
0

···
···
..
.
···


1 n
n! t
1
n−1 

(n−1)! t


..
.
1




Where λ is the eigenvalue (the value on the diagonal) of the jordan-canonical matrix.

2

114

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis

State-Transition Matrix

13.4.3 Inverse Laplace Method
We can calculate the state-transition matrix (or any matrix exponential function) by taking
the following inverse Laplace transform:
eAt = L−1 [(sI − A)−1 ]
If A is a high-order matrix, this inverse can be diﬃcult to solve.
If the A matrix is in the Jordan Canonical form, then the matrix exponential can be
generated quickly using the following formula:


1
0
eJt = eλt .
.
.
0

t
1
.
.
.
0

1 2
t
2!

t
.
.
.
0

···
···

1 n
t
n!
1
tn−1
(n−1)!

..

.
.
.
1

.
···






Where λ is the eigenvalue (the value on the diagonal) of the jordan-canonical matrix.

13.4.4 Spectral Decomposition
If we know all the eigenvalues of A, we can create our transition matrix T, and our inverse
transition matrix T-1 These matrices will be the matrices of the right and left eigenvectors,
respectively. If we have both the left and the right eigenvectors, we can calculate the
state-transition matrix as:
[Spectral Decomposition]
eAt =

n
∑

eλi t vi wi′

i=1

Note that wi ' is the transpose of the ith left-eigenvector, not the derivative of it. We will
discuss the concepts of ”eigenvalues”, ”eigenvectors”, and the technique of spectral decomposition in more detail in a later chapter.

13.4.5 Cayley-Hamilton Theorem
For more information on the Cayley-Hamilton Theorem, see:
Engineering Analysisa
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis

The Cayley-Hamilton Theorem can also be used to ﬁnd a solution for a matrix exponential. For any eigenvalue of the system matrix A, λ, we can show that the two equations
are equivalent:

115

Solutions for Linear Systems

eλt = a0 + a1 λt + a2 λ2 t2 + · · · + an−1 λn−1 tn−1
Once we solve for the coeﬃcients of the equation, a, we can then plug those coeﬃcients into
the following equation:
eAt = a0 I + a1 At + a2 A2 t2 + · · · + an−1 An−1 tn−1

13.4.6 Example: Oﬀ-Diagonal Matrix
Given the following matrix A, ﬁnd the state-transition matrix:
[

0 1
A=
−1 0

]

We can ﬁnd the eigenvalues of this matrix as λ = i, -i. If we plug these values into our
eigenvector equation, we get:
i −1
v =0
1 i 1
−i −1
v =0
1 −i 2
And we can solve for our eigenvectors:
[ ]

1
i

v1 =
[

1
v2 =
−i

]

With our eigenvectors, we can solve for our left-eigenvectors:
[

]

1
w1 =
−i
[ ]

w2 =

1
i

Now, using spectral decomposition, we can construct the state-transition matrix:
[ ]

eAt = eit

[

]

]
]
1 [
1 [
1 −i + e−it
1 i
i
−i

If we remember Euler's Identity, we can decompose the complex exponentials into
sinusoids. Performing the vector multiplications, all the imaginary terms cancel out,
and we are left with our result:
[

eAt =

116

cos t sin t
− sin t cos t

]

State-Transition Matrix

The reader is encouraged to perform the multiplications, and attempt to derive this
result.

13.4.7 Example: Sympy Calculation
With the freely available python library 'sympy' we can very easily calculate the
state-transition matrix automatically:
>>> from sympy import *
>>> t = symbols('t', positive = true)
>>> A = Matrix([[0,1],[-1,0]])
>>> exp(A*t).expand(complex=True)
⎡cos(t) sin(t)⎤
⎢
⎥
⎣-sin(t) cos(t)⎦

You can also try it out yourself on this website:
sympy live3

13.4.8 Example: MATLAB Calculation
Using the symbolic toolbox in MATLAB, we can write MATLAB code to automatically generate the state-transition matrix for a given input matrix A. Here is an
example of MATLAB code that can perform this task:
function [phi] = statetrans(A)
t = sym('t');
phi = expm(A * t);
end

Use this MATLAB function to ﬁnd the state-transition matrix for the following matrices
(warning, calculation may take some time):
[

2 0
1. A1 =
0 2

]

[

0 1
2. A2 =
−1 0
[

]

]

2 1
3. A3 =
0 2
Matrix 1 is a diagonal matrix, Matrix 2 has complex eigenvalues, and Matrix 3 is
Jordan canonical form. These three matrices should be representative of some of
the common forms of system matrices. The following code snippets are the input
commands into MATLAB to produce these matrices, and the output results:
Matrix A1

117

Solutions for Linear Systems

>> A1 = [2 0 ; 0 2]; >> statetrans(A1)
ans =
[ exp(2*t), 0] [ 0, exp(2*t)]
Matrix A2
>> A2 = [0 1 ; -1 0]; >> statetrans(A1)
ans =
[ cos(t), sin(t)] [ -sin(t), cos(t)]
Matrix A3
>> A1 = [2 1 ; 0 2]; >> statetrans(A1)
ans =
[ exp(2*t), t*exp(2*t)] [ 0, exp(2*t)]

13.4.9 Example: Multiple Methods in MATLAB
There are multiple methods in MATLAB to compute the state transtion matrix, from a
scalar (time-invariant) matrix A. The following methods are all going to rely on the Symbolic Toolbox to perform the equation manipulations. At the end of each code snippet,
the variable eAt contains the state-transition matrix of matrix A.
Direct Method
t = sym('t'); eAt = expm(A * t);
Laplace Transform Method
s = sym('s'); [n,n] = size(A); in = inv(s*eye(n) - A); eAt = ilaplace(in);
Spectral Decomposition
t = sym('t'); [n,n] = size(A); [V, e] = eig(A); W = inv(V); sum = [0 0;0 0]; for I = 1:n
sum = sum + expm(e(I,I)*t)*V(:,I)*W(I,:); end; eAt = sum;
All three of these methods should produce the same answers. The student is encouraged
to verify this.
he:‫תורתהבקרה‬/‫פתרוןמשוואתהמצבעבורמערכתקבועהבזמן‬4

4

118

https://he.wikibooks.org/wiki/%D7%AA%D7%95%D7%A8%D7%AA%20%D7%94%D7%91%D7%A7%D7%A8%D7%
94%2F%D7%A4%D7%AA%D7%A8%D7%95%D7%9F%20%D7%9E%D7%A9%D7%95%D7%95%D7%90%D7%AA%20%D7%94%
D7%9E%D7%A6%D7%91%20%D7%A2%D7%91%D7%95%D7%A8%20%D7%9E%D7%A2%D7%A8%D7%9B%D7%AA%20%D7%
A7%D7%91%D7%95%D7%A2%D7%94%20%D7%91%D7%96%D7%9E%D7%9F

14 Time-Variant System Solutions
14.1 General Time Variant Solution
The state-space equations can be solved for time-variant systems, but the solution is significantly more complicated than the time-invariant case. Our time-variant state equation is
given as follows:
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t) + B(t)u(t)
We can say that the general solution to time-variant state-equation is deﬁned as:
[Time-Variant General Solution]
∫ t

x(t) = ϕ(t, t0 )x(t0 ) +

ϕ(t, τ )B(τ )u(τ )dτ
t0

Matrix Dimensions:
A: p × p
B: p × q
C: r × p
D: r × q

The function ϕ is called the state-transition matrix, because it (like the matrix exponential from the time-invariant case) controls the change for states in the state equation.
However, unlike the time-invariant case, we cannot deﬁne this as a simple exponential. In
fact, ϕ can't be deﬁned in general, because it will actually be a diﬀerent function for every
system. However, the state-transition matrix does follow some basic properties that we can
use to determine the state-transition matrix.
In a time-variant system, the general solution is obtained when the state-transition matrix
is determined. For that reason, the ﬁrst thing (and the most important thing) that we need
to do here is ﬁnd that matrix. We will discuss the solution to that matrix below.

119

Time-Variant System Solutions

14.1.1 State Transition Matrix
Note:
The state transition matrix ϕ is a matrix function of two variables (we will say t and τ ).
Once the form of the matrix is solved, we will plug in the initial time, t0 in place of the
variable τ . Because of the nature of this matrix, and the properties that it must satisfy,
this matrix typically is composed of exponential or sinusoidal functions. The exact form
of the state-transition matrix is dependent on the system itself, and the form of the
system's diﬀerential equation. There is no single ”template solution” for this matrix.
The state transition matrix ϕ is not completely unknown, it must always satisfy the following
relationships:
∂ϕ(t, t0 )
= A(t)ϕ(t, t0 )
∂t
ϕ(τ, τ ) = I
And ϕ also must have the following properties:
1.
2.
3.
4.

ϕ(t2 , t1 )ϕ(t1 , t0 ) = ϕ(t2 , t0 )
ϕ−1 (t, τ ) = ϕ(τ, t)
ϕ−1 (t, τ )ϕ(t, τ ) = I
dϕ(t0 ,t0 )
= A(t)
dt

If the system is time-invariant, we can deﬁne ϕ as:
ϕ(t, t0 ) = eA(t−t0 )
The reader can verify that this solution for a time-invariant system satisﬁes all the properties
listed above. However, in the time-variant case, there are many diﬀerent functions that may
satisfy these requirements, and the solution is dependent on the structure of the system.
The state-transition matrix must be determined before analysis on the time-varying solution
can continue. We will discuss some of the methods for determining this matrix below.

14.2 Time-Variant, Zero Input
As the most basic case, we will consider the case of a system with zero input. If the system
has no input, then the state equation is given as:
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t)

120

Time-Variant, Zero Input
And we are interested in the response of this system in the time interval T = (a, b). The
ﬁrst thing we want to do in this case is ﬁnd a fundamental matrix of the above equation.
The fundamental matrix is related

14.2.1 Fundamental Matrix
Here, x is an n × 1 vector, and A is an n × n matrix.
Given the equation:
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t)
The solutions to this equation form an n-dimensional vector space in the interval T = (a,
b). Any set of n linearly-independent solutions {x1 , x2 , ..., xn } to the equation above is
called a fundamental set of solutions.
Readers who have a background in Linear Algebraa may recognize that the fundamental
set is a basis set for the solution space. Any basis set that spans the entire solution
space is a valid fundamental set.
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Linear%20Algebra

A fundamental matrix FM is formed by creating a matrix out of the n fundamental
vectors. We will denote the fundamental matrix with a script capital X:
[

X = x1 x2 · · · xn

]

The fundamental matrix will satisfy the state equation:
X ′ (t) = A(t)X (t)
Also, any matrix that solves this equation can be a fundamental matrix if and only if the
determinant of the matrix is non-zero for all time t in the interval T. The determinant must
be non-zero, because we are going to use the inverse of the fundamental matrix to solve for
the state-transition matrix.

14.2.2 State Transition Matrix
Once we have the fundamental matrix of a system, we can use it to ﬁnd the state transition
matrix of the system:
ϕ(t, t0 ) = X (t)X −1 (t0 )

121

Time-Variant System Solutions
The inverse of the fundamental matrix exists, because we specify in the deﬁnition above that
it must have a non-zero determinant, and therefore must be non-singular. The reader should
note that this is only one possible method for determining the state transition matrix, and
we will discuss other methods below.

14.2.3 Example: 2-Dimensional System
Given the following fundamental matrix, Find the state-transition matrix.
[

e−t 12 et
X (t) =
0 e−t

]

the ﬁrst task is to ﬁnd the inverse of the fundamental matrix. Because the fundamental
matrix is a 2 × 2 matrix, the inverse can be given easily through a common formula:
[

e−t − 12 et
0
e−t

X −1 (t) =

e−2t

]

[

et − 12 e3t
=
0
et

]

The state-transition matrix is given by:
[

ϕ(t, t0 ) = X (t)X −1 (t0 ) =
[

e−t+t0
ϕ(t, t0 ) =
0

e−t − 12 et
0
e−t

][

et0
0

1 3t0
2e
et0

]

]

1 t+t0
− e−t+3t0 )
2 (e
−t+t
0
e

14.2.4 Other Methods
There are other methods for ﬁnding the state transition matrix besides having to ﬁnd the
fundamental matrix.
Method 1
If A(t) is triangular (upper or lower triangular), the state transition matrix can be determined by sequentially integrating the individual rows of the state equation.
Method 2
If for every τ and t, the state matrix commutes as follows:
[∫ t

]

]

[∫ t

A(ζ)dζ A(t)

A(ζ)dζ =

A(t)

τ

τ

Then the state-transition matrix can be given as:
∫t

ϕ(t, τ ) = e τ A(ζ)dζ
The state transition matrix will commute as described above if any of the following conditions are true:

122

Time-Variant, Zero Input
1. A is a constant matrix (time-invariant)
2. A is a diagonal matrix
3. If A = Āf (t), where Ā is a constant matrix, and f(t) is a scalar-valued function (not
a matrix).
If none of the above conditions are true, then you must use method 3.
Method 3
If A(t) can be decomposed as the following sum:

A(t) =

n
∑

Mi fi (t)

i=1

Where Mi is a constant matrix such that Mi Mj = Mj Mi , and fi is a scalar-valued function.
If A(t) can be decomposed in this way, then the state-transition matrix can be given as:

ϕ(t, τ ) =

∫t
n
∏
M
f (θ)dθ

e

i

τ

i

i=1

It will be left as an exercise for the reader to prove that if A(t) is time-invariant, that the
equation in method 2 above will reduce to the state-transition matrix eA(t−τ ) .

14.2.5 Example: Using Method 3
Use method 3, above, to compute the state-transition matrix for the system if the system
matrix A is given by:
[

t 1
A=
−1 t

]

We can decompose this matrix as follows:
[

]

[

1 0
0 1
A=
t+
0 1
−1 0

]

Where f1 (t) = t, and f2 (t) = 1. Using the formula described above gives us:
M1

ϕ(t, τ ) = e

∫t
τ

θdθ M2

e

∫t
τ

dθ

Solving the two integrations gives us:
[

ϕ(t, τ ) = e

] [

2
2
0
1 (t − τ )
2
0
(t2 − τ 2 )

e

0
−t + τ

t−τ
0

]

The ﬁrst term is a diagonal matrix, and the solution to that matrix function is all the
individual elements of the matrix raised as an exponent of e. The second term can be
decomposed as:

123

Time-Variant System Solutions
[

e

t−τ
0

0
−t + τ

]

[

=e

]

0 1
(t−τ )
−1 0

The ﬁnal solution is given as:

cos(t − τ ) sin(t − τ )
=
− sin(t − τ ) cos(t − τ )
[ 1

e 2 (t −τ )
0
=
1 2
2
(t
0
e 2 −τ )

ϕ(t, τ )
[

]

[

2

2

]

][

]

cos(t − τ ) sin(t − τ )
=
− sin(t − τ ) cos(t − τ )

e 2 (t −τ ) cos(t − τ ) e 2 (t −τ ) sin(t − τ )
1 2
1 2
2
2
−e 2 (t −τ ) sin(t − τ ) e 2 (t −τ ) cos(t − τ )
1

2

2

1

2

2

14.3 Time-Variant, Non-zero Input
If the input to the system is not zero, it turns out that all the analysis that we performed
above still holds. We can still construct the fundamental matrix, and we can still represent
the system solution in terms of the state transition matrix ϕ.
We can show that the general solution to the state-space equations is actually the solution:
∫ t

x(t) = ϕ(t, t0 )x(t0 ) +

ϕ(t, τ )B(τ )u(τ )dτ
t0

124

15 Digital State-Space
15.1 Digital Systems
Digital systems, expressed previously as diﬀerence equations or Z-Transform transfer functions can also be used with the state-space representation. Also, all the same techniques
for dealing with analog systems can be applied to digital systems, with only minor changes.

15.2 Digital Systems
For digital systems, we can write similar equations, using discrete data sets:
x[k + 1] = Ax[k] + Bu[k]
y[k] = Cx[k] + Du[k]

15.2.1 Zero-Order Hold Derivation
If we have a continuous-time state equation:
x′ (t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
We can derive the digital version of this equation that we discussed above. We take the
Laplace transform of our equation:
X(s) = (sI − A)−1 Bu(s) + (sI − A)−1 x(0)
Now, taking the inverse Laplace transform gives us our time-domain system, keeping in
mind that the inverse Laplace transform of the (sI - A) term is our state-transition matrix,
Φ:
x(t) = L−1 (X(s)) = Φ(t − t0 )x(0) +

∫ t
t0

Φ(t − τ )Bu(τ )dτ

Now, we apply a zero-order hold on our input, to make the system digital. Notice that we
set our start time t0 = kT, because we are only interested in the behavior of our system
during a single sample period:

125

Digital State-Space

u(t) = u(kT ), kT ≤ t ≤ (k + 1)T
∫ t

x(t) = Φ(t, kT )x(kT ) +

Φ(t, τ )Bdτ u(kT )
kT

We were able to remove u(kT) from the integral because it did not rely on τ . We now deﬁne
a new function, Γ, as follows:
∫ t

Γ(t, t0 ) =

Φ(t, τ )Bdτ
t0

Inserting this new expression into our equation, and setting t = (k + 1)T gives us:
x((k + 1)T ) = Φ((k + 1)T, kT )x(kT ) + Γ((k + 1)T, kT )u(kT )
Now Φ(T) and Γ(T) are constant matrices, and we can give them new names.
d subscript denotes that they are digital versions of the coeﬃcient matrices:

The

Ad = Φ((k + 1)T, kT )

Bd = Γ((k + 1)T, kT )
We can use these values in our state equation, converting to our bracket notation instead:
x[k + 1] = Ad x[k] + Bd u[k]

15.3 Relating Continuous and Discrete Systems
w:Discretization1 Continuous and discrete systems that perform similarly can be related
together through a set of relationships. It should come as no surprise that a discrete system
and a continuous system will have diﬀerent characteristics and diﬀerent coeﬃcient matrices.
If we consider that a discrete system is the same as a continuous system, except that it is
sampled with a sampling time T, then the relationships below will hold. The process of
converting an analog system for use with digital hardware is called discretization. We've
given a basic introduction to discretization already, but we will discuss it in more detail
here.

1

126

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discretization

Relating Continuous and Discrete Systems

15.3.1 Discrete Coeﬃcient Matrices
Of primary importance in discretization is the computation of the associated coeﬃcient
matrices from the continuous-time counterparts. If we have the continuous system (A, B,
C, D), we can use the relationship t = kT to transform the state-space solution into a
sampled system:
AkT

x(kT ) = e

∫ kT

x(0) +

eA(kT −τ ) Bu(τ )dτ

0

AkT

x[k] = e

∫ kT

x[0] +

eA(kT −τ ) Bu(τ )dτ

0

Now, if we want to analyze the k+1 term, we can solve the equation again:
x[k + 1] = eA(k+1)T x[0] +

∫ (k+1)T

eA((k+1)T −τ ) Bu(τ )dτ

0

Separating out the variables, and breaking the integral into two parts gives us:

AT AkT

x[k + 1] = e

e

∫ kT

e

x[0] +

AT A(kT −τ )

e

∫ (k+1)T

Bu(τ )dτ +

eA(kT +T −τ ) Bu(τ )dτ

kT

0

If we substitute in a new variable β = (k + 1)T + τ , and if we see the following relationship:
eAkT x[0] = x[k]
We get our ﬁnal result:
x[k + 1] = eAT x[k] +

(∫
T

)

eAα dα Bu[k]

0

Comparing this equation to our regular solution gives us a set of relationships for converting
the continuous-time system into a discrete-time system. Here, we will use ”d” subscripts to
denote the system matrices of a discrete system, and we will use a ”c” subscript to denote
the system matrices of a continuous system.
Matrix Dimensions:
A: p × p
B: p × q
C: r × p
D: r × q

Ad = eAc T

127

Digital State-Space
∫

Bd = 0T eAc τ dτ Bc
Cd = Cc
Dd = Dc

c2d
If the Ac matrix is nonsingular, then we can ﬁnd its inverse and instead deﬁne Bd as:
Bd = A−1
c (Ad − I)Bc
The diﬀerences in the discrete and continuous matrices are due to the fact that the underlying equations that describe our systems are diﬀerent. Continuous-time systems are
represented by linear diﬀerential equations, while the digital systems are described by difference equations. High order terms in a diﬀerence equation are delayed copies of the signals,
while high order terms in the diﬀerential equations are derivatives of the analog signal.
If we have a complicated analog system, and we would like to implement that system in a
digital computer, we can use the above transformations to make our matrices conform to
the new paradigm.

15.3.2 Notation
Because the coeﬃcient matrices for the discrete systems are computed diﬀerently from the
continuous-time coeﬃcient matrices, and because the matrices technically represent diﬀerent
things, it is not uncommon in the literature to denote these matrices with diﬀerent variables.
For instance, the following variables are used in place of A and B frequently:
Ω = Ad

R = Bd
These substitutions would give us a system deﬁned by the ordered quadruple (Ω, R, C,
D) for representing our equations.
As a matter of notational convenience, we will use the letters A and B to represent these
matrices throughout the rest of this book.

15.4 Converting Diﬀerence Equations
Now, let's say that we have a 3rd order diﬀerence equation, that describes a discrete-time
system:

128

Solving for x[n]

y[n + 3] + a2 y[n + 2] + a1 y[n + 1] + a0 y[n] = u[n]
From here, we can deﬁne a set of discrete state variables x in the following manner:
x1 [n] = y[n]
x2 [n] = y[n + 1]
x3 [n] = y[n + 2]
Which in turn gives us 3 ﬁrst-order diﬀerence equations:
x1 [n + 1] = y[n + 1] = x2 [n]
x2 [n + 1] = y[n + 2] = x3 [n]
x3 [n + 1] = y[n + 3]
Again, we say that matrix x is a vertical vector of the 3 state variables we have deﬁned,
and we can write our state equation in the same form as if it were a continuous-time
system:




 

0
0
1
0
 


0
1  x[n] + 0 u[n]
x[n + 1] =  0
1
−a0 −a1 −a2
[

]

y[n] = 1 0 0 x[n]

15.5 Solving for x[n]
We can ﬁnd a general time-invariant solution for the discrete time diﬀerence equations. Let
us start working up a pattern. We know the discrete state equation:
x[n + 1] = Ax[n] + Bu[n]
Starting from time n = 0, we can start to create a pattern:
x[1] = Ax[0] + Bu[0]

x[2] = Ax[1] + Bu[1] = A2 x[0] + ABu[0] + Bu[1]

x[3] = Ax[2] + Bu[2] = A3 x[0] + A2 Bu[0] + ABu[1] + Bu[2]
With a little algebraic trickery, we can reduce this pattern to a single equation:
[General State Equation Solution]

129

Digital State-Space

x[n] = An x[n0 ] +

n−1
∑

An−1−m Bu[m]

m=0

Substituting this result into the output equation gives us:
[General Output Equation Solution]

y[n] = CAn x[n0 ] +

n−1
∑

CAn−1−m Bu[m] + Du[n]

m=0

15.6 Time Variant Solutions
If the system is time-variant, we have a general solution that is similar to the continuoustime case:

x[n] = ϕ[n, n0 ]x[n0 ] +

n−1
∑

ϕ[n, m + 1]B[m]u[m]

m=n0

y[n] = C[n]ϕ[n, n0 ]x[n0 ] + C[n]

n−1
∑

ϕ[n, m + 1]B[m]u[m] + D[n]u[n]

m=n0

Where φ, the state transition matrix, is deﬁned in a similar manner to the statetransition matrix in the continuous case. However, some of the properties in the discrete
time are diﬀerent. For instance, the inverse of the state-transition matrix does not need to
exist, and in many systems it does not exist.

15.6.1 State Transition Matrix
The discrete time state transition matrix is the unique solution of the equation:
ϕ[k + 1, k0 ] = A[k]ϕ[k, k0 ]
Where the following restriction must hold:
ϕ[k0 , k0 ] = I
From this deﬁnition, an obvious way to calculate this state transition matrix presents itself:
ϕ[k, k0 ] = A[k − 1]A[k − 2]A[k − 3] · · · A[k0 ]
Or,

130

MATLAB Calculations

ϕ[k, k0 ] =

k−k
∏0

A[k − m]

m=1

15.7 MATLAB Calculations
MATLAB is a computer program, and therefore calculates all systems using digital methods.
The MATLAB function lsim is used to simulate a continuous system with a speciﬁed input.
This function works by calling the c2d, which converts a system (A, B, C, D) into the
equivalent discrete system. Once the system model is discretized, the function passes control
to the dlsim function, which is used to simulate discrete-time systems with the speciﬁed
input.
Because of this, simulation programs like MATLAB are subjected to round-oﬀ errors associated with the discretization process.

131

16 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
16.1 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors cannot be calculated from time-variant matrices. If the
system is time-variant, the methods described in this chapter will not produce valid
results.
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the system matrix play a key role in determining the
response of the system. It is important to note that only square matrices have eigenvalues
and eigenvectors associated with them. Non-square matrices cannot be analyzed using the
methods below.
The word ”eigen” comes from German and means ”own”, while it is the Dutch word for
”characteristic”, and so this chapter could also be called ”Characteristic values and characteristic vectors”. The terms ”Eigenvalues” and ”Eigenvectors” are most commonly used.
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors have a number of properties that make them valuable tools in
analysis, and they also have a number of valuable relationships with the matrix from which
they are derived. Computing the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors of the system matrix is
one of the most important things that should be done when beginning to analyze a system
matrix, second only to calculating the matrix exponential of the system matrix.
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the system determine the relationship between the
individual system state variables (the members of the x vector), the response of the system
to inputs, and the stability of the system. Also, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be used
to calculate the matrix exponential of the system matrix (through spectral decomposition).
The remainder of this chapter will discuss eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and the ways that
they aﬀect their respective systems.

16.2 Characteristic Equation
The characteristic equation of the system matrix A is given as:
[Matrix Characteristic Equation]
Av = λv
Where λ are scalar values called the eigenvalues, and v are the corresponding eigenvectors. To solve for the eigenvalues of a matrix, we can take the following determinant:

133

Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors

|A − λI| = 0
To solve for the eigenvectors, we can then add an additional term, and solve for v:
(A − λI)v = 0
Another value worth ﬁnding are the left eigenvectors of a system, deﬁned as w in the
modiﬁed characteristic equation:
[Left-Eigenvector Equation]
wA = λw
For more information about eigenvalues, eigenvectors, and left eigenvectors, read the appropriate sections in the following books:
• Linear Algebra1
• Engineering Analysis2

16.2.1 Diagonalization
Note:
The transition matrix T should not be confused with the sampling time of a discrete
system. If needed, we will use subscripts to diﬀerentiate between the two.
If the matrix A has a complete set of distinct eigenvalues, the matrix can be diagonalized.
A diagonal matrix is a matrix that only has entries on the diagonal, and all the rest of the
entries in the matrix are zero. We can deﬁne a transformation matrix, T, that satisﬁes
the diagonalization transformation:
A = T DT −1
Which in turn will satisfy the relationship:
eAt = T eDt T −1
The right-hand side of the equation may look more complicated, but because Dis a diagonal
matrix here (not to be confused with the feed-forward matrix from the output equation),
the calculations are much easier.
We can deﬁne the transition matrix, and the inverse transition matrix in terms of the
eigenvectors and the left eigenvectors:
1
2

134

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Linear%20Algebra
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis

Exponential Matrix Decomposition
[

T = v1 v2 v3 · · · vn

]

 ′
w1
 w′ 
 2
 ′
w 
T −1 = 
 3
 .. 
 . 

wn′

We will further discuss the concept of diagonalization later in this chapter.

16.3 Exponential Matrix Decomposition
For more information about spectral decomposition, see:
Spectral Decompositiona
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis%2FSpectral%20Decomposition

A matrix exponential can be decomposed into a sum of the eigenvectors, eigenvalues, and
left eigenvectors, as follows:
eAt =

n
∑

eλi t vi wi′

i=1

Notice that this equation only holds in this form if the matrix A has a complete set of n
distinct eigenvalues. Since w'i is a row vector, and x(0) is a column vector of the initial
system states, we can combine those two into a scalar coeﬃcient α:
eAt x(t0 ) =

n
∑

αi eλi t vi

i=1

Since the state transition matrix determines how the system responds to an input, we can
see that the system eigenvalues and eigenvectors are a key part of the system response. Let
us plug this decomposition into the general solution to the state equation:
[State Equation Spectral Decomposition]

x(t) =

n
∑
i=1

λi t

αi e

vi +

n ∫ t
∑
i=1 0

eλi (t−τ ) vi wi′ Bu(τ )dτ

We will talk about this equation in the following sections.

135

Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors

16.3.1 State Relationship
As we can see from the above equation, the individual elements of the state vector
x(t) cannot take arbitrary values, but they are instead related by weighted sums of multiples
of the systems right-eigenvectors.

16.3.2 Decoupling
For people who are familiar with linear algebra, the left-eigenvector of the matrix A
must be in the null space of the matrix B to decouple the system.
If a system can be designed such that the following relationship holds true:
wi′ B = 0
then the system response from that particular eigenvalue will not be aﬀected by the system
input u, and we say that the system has been decoupled. Such a thing is diﬃcult to do in
practice.

16.3.3 Condition Number
With every matrix there is associated a particular number called the condition number of
that matrix. The condition number tells a number of things about a matrix, and it is worth
calculating. The condition number, k, is deﬁned as:
[Condition Number]
k=

i ∥i ∥
|wi′ vi |

Systems with smaller condition numbers are better, for a number of reasons:
1. Large condition numbers lead to a large transient response of the system
2. Large condition numbers make the system eigenvalues more sensitive to changes in
the system.
We will discuss the issue of eigenvalue sensitivity more in a later section.

16.3.4 Stability
We will talk about stability at length in later chapters, but is a good time to point out a
simple fact concerning the eigenvalues of the system. Notice that if the eigenvalues of the
system matrix A are positive, or (if they are complex) that they have positive real parts, that
the system state (and therefore the system output, scaled by the C matrix) will approach
inﬁnity as time t approaches inﬁnity. In essence, if the eigenvalues are positive, the system
will not satisfy the condition of BIBO stability, and will therefore become unstable.

136

Non-Unique Eigenvalues
Another factor that is worth mentioning is that a manufactured system never exactly
matches the system model, and there will always been inaccuracies in the speciﬁcations
of the component parts used, within a certain tolerance. As such, the system matrix will be
slightly diﬀerent from the mathematical model of the system (although good systems will
not be severely diﬀerent), and therefore the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the system will
not be the same values as those derived from the model. These facts give rise to several
results:
1. Systems with high condition numbers may have eigenvalues that diﬀer by a large
amount from those derived from the mathematical model. This means that the system
response of the physical system may be very diﬀerent from the intended response of
the model.
2. Systems with high condition numbers may become unstable simply as a result of inaccuracies in the component parts used in the manufacturing process.
For those reasons, the system eigenvalues and the condition number of the system matrix
are highly important variables to consider when analyzing and designing a system. We will
discuss the topic of stability in more detail in later chapters.

16.4 Non-Unique Eigenvalues
The decomposition above only works if the matrix A has a full set of n distinct eigenvalues
(and corresponding eigenvectors). If A does not have n distinct eigenvectors, then a set
of generalized eigenvectors need to be determined. The generalized eigenvectors will
produce a similar matrix that is in Jordan canonical form, not the diagonal form we
were using earlier.

16.4.1 Generalized Eigenvectors
Generalized eigenvectors can be generated using the following equation:
[Generalized Eigenvector Generating Equation]
(A − λI)vn+1 = vn
if d is the number of times that a given eigenvalue is repeated, and p is the number of
unique eigenvectors derived from those eigenvalues, then there will be q = d - p generalized
eigenvectors. Generalized eigenvectors are developed by plugging in the regular eigenvectors
into the equation above (vn ). Some regular eigenvectors might not produce any non-trivial
generalized eigenvectors. Generalized eigenvectors may also be plugged into the equation
above to produce additional generalized eigenvectors. It is important to note that the
generalized eigenvectors form an ordered series, and they must be kept in order during
analysis or the results will not be correct.

137

Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors

16.4.2 Example: One Repeated Set
We have a 5 × 5 matrix A with eigenvalues λ = 1, 1, 1, 2, 2. For λ = 1, there is 1 distinct
eigenvector a. For λ = 2 there is 1 distinct eigenvector b. From a, we generate the
generalized eigenvector c, and from c we can generate vector d. From the eigevector b,
we generate the generalized eigevector e. In order our eigenvectors are listed as:
[a c d b e]
Notice how c and d are listed in order after the eigenvector that they are generated
from, a. Also, we could reorder this as:
[b e a c d]
because the generalized eigenvectors are listed in order after the regular eigenvector
that they are generated from. Regular eigenvectors can be listed in any order.

16.4.3 Example: Two Repeated Sets
We have a 4 × 4 matrix A with eigenvalues λ = 1, 1, 1, 2. For λ = 1 we have two eigevectors, a and b. For λ = 2 we have an eigenvector c.
We need to generate a fourth eigenvector, d. The only eigenvalue that needs another
eigenvector is λ = 1, however there are already two eigevectors associated with that
eigenvalue, and only one of them will generate a non-trivial generalized eigenvector. To
ﬁgure out which one works, we need to plug both vectors into the generating equation:
(A − λI) λ=1 d = a
(A − λI) λ=1 d = b
If a generates the correct vector d, we will order our eigenvectors as:
[a d b c]
but if b generates the correct vector, we can order it as:
[a b d c]

16.4.4 Jordan Canonical Form
For more information about Jordan Canonical Form, see:
Matrix Formsa
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis%2FMatrix%20Forms

If a matrix has a complete set of distinct eigenvectors, the transition matrix T can be
deﬁned as the matrix of those eigenvectors, and the resultant transformed matrix will be
a diagonal matrix. However, if the eigenvectors are not unique, and there are a number
of generalized eigenvectors associated with the matrix, the transition matrix T will consist
of the ordered set of the regular eigenvectors and generalized eigenvectors. The regular

138

Equivalence Transformations
eigenvectors that did not produce any generalized eigenvectors (if any) should be ﬁrst in
the order, followed by the eigenvectors that did produce generalized eigenvectors, and the
generalized eigenvectors that they produced (in appropriate sequence).
Once the T matrix has been produced, the matrix can be transformed by it and it's inverse:
A = T −1 JT
The J matrix will be a Jordan block matrix. The format of the Jordan block matrix will
be as follows:


D 0

 0 J1
J =
..
 ..
.
.
0 0

···
···
..
.



0
0

.. 

.

· · · Jn

Where D is the diagonal block produced by the regular eigenvectors that are not associated
with generalized eigenvectors (if any). The Jn blocks are standard Jordan blocks with a size
corresponding to the number of eigenvectors/generalized eigenvectors in each sequence. In
each Jn block, the eigenvalue associated with the regular eigenvector of the sequence is on
the main diagonal, and there are 1's in the sub-diagonal.

16.4.5 System Response

16.5 Equivalence Transformations
If we have a non-singular n × n matrix P, we can deﬁne a transformed vector ”x bar” as:
x̄ = P x
We can transform the entire state-space equation set as follows:
x̄′ (t) = Āx̄(t) + B̄u(t)

ȳ(t) = C̄ x̄(t) + D̄u(t)
Where:
Ā = P AP −1
B̄ = P B
C̄ = CP −1
D̄ = D

139

Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
We call the matrix P the equivalence transformation between the two sets of equations.
It is important to note that the eigenvalues of the matrix A (which are of primary importance to the system) do not change under the equivalence transformation. The eigenvectors
of A, and the eigenvectors of Ā are related by the matrix P.

16.5.1 Lyapunov Transformations
The transformation matrix P is called a Lyapunov Transformation if the following conditions hold:
• P(t) is nonsingular.
• P(t) and P'(t) are continuous
• P(t) and the inverse transformation matrix P-1 (t) are ﬁnite for all t.
If a system is time-variant, it can frequently be useful to use a Lyapunov transformation to
convert the system to an equivalent system with a constant A matrix. This is not always
possible in general, however it is possible if the A(t) matrix is periodic.

16.5.2 System Diagonalization
If the A matrix is time-invariant, we can construct the matrix V from the eigenvectors of
A. The V matrix can be used to transform the A matrix to a diagonal matrix. Our new
system becomes:
V x′ (t) = V AV −1 V x(t) + V Bu(t)
y(t) = CV −1 V x(t) + Du(t)
Since our system matrix is now diagonal (or Jordan canonical), the calculation of the statetransition matrix is simpliﬁed:
eV AV

−1

=Λ

Where Λ is a diagonal matrix.

16.5.3 MATLAB Transformations
The MATLAB function ss2ss can be used to apply an equivalence transformation to a
system. If we have a set of matrices A, B, C and D, we can create equivalent matrices as
such:
[Ap, Bp, Cp, Dp] = ss2ss(A, B, C, D, p);

Where p is the equivalence transformation matrix.

140

17 MIMO Systems
17.1 Multi-Input, Multi-Output
Systems with more than one input and/or more than one output are known as Multi-Input
Multi-Output systems, or they are frequently known by the abbreviation MIMO. This
is in contrast to systems that have only a single input and a single output (SISO), like we
have been discussing previously.

17.2 State-Space Representation
See the Formatting Sectiona in the introduction if the notation in this page is confusing.
a

Chapter 2.11 on page 14

MIMO systems that are lumped and linear can be described easily with state-space equations. To represent multiple inputs we expand the input u(t) into a vector U(t) with the
desired number of inputs. Likewise, to represent a system with multiple outputs, we expand
y(t) into Y(t), which is a vector of all the outputs. For this method to work, the outputs
must be linearly dependent on the input vector and the state vector.
X ′ (t) = AX(t) + BU (t)

Y (t) = CX(t) + DU (t)

17.2.1 Example: Two Inputs and Two Outputs
Let's say that we have two outputs, y1 and y2 , and two inputs, u1 and u2 . These are
related in our system through the following system of diﬀerential equations:
y1′′ + a1 y1′ + a0 (y1 + y2 ) = u1 (t)
y2′ + a2 (y2 − y1 ) = u2 (t)
now, we can assign our state variables as such, and produce our ﬁrst-order diﬀerential
equations:
x1 = y1
x4 = y2

141

MIMO Systems

x′1 = y1′ = x2
x′2 = −a1 x2 − a0 (x1 + x4 ) + u1 (t)
x′4 = −a2 (x4 − x1 ) + u2 (t)
And ﬁnally we can assemble our state space equations:


0
1
−a −a

1
x′ =  0
 0
0
a2
0
[

]

[





0
0
0


0 −a0 
1
x+
0
0
1 
0 −a2
0



0 [ ]
0
 u1

0 u2
1

]

y1
1 0 0 0
=
x(t)
y2
0 0 0 1

17.3 Transfer Function Matrix
If the system is LTI and Lumped, we can take the Laplace Transform of the state-space
equations, as follows:
L[X ′ (t)] = L[AX(t)] + L[BU (t)]
L[Y (t)] = L[CX(t)] + L[DU (t)]
Which gives us the result:
sX(s) − X(0) = AX(s) + BU(s)

Y(s) = CX(s) + DU(s)
Where X(0) is the initial conditions of the system state vector in the time domain. If
the system is relaxed, we can ignore this term, but for completeness we will continue the
derivation with it.
We can separate out the variables in the state equation as follows:
sX(s) − AX(s) = X(0) + BU(s)
Then factor out an X(s):
[sI − A]X(s) = X(0) + BU(s)
And then we can multiply both sides by the inverse of [sI - A] to give us our state equation:

142

Transfer Function Matrix

X(s) = [sI − A]−1 X(0) + [sI − A]−1 BU(s)
Now, if we plug in this value for X(s) into our output equation, above, we get a more
complicated equation:
Y(s) = C([sI − A]−1 X(0) + [sI − A]−1 BU(s)) + DU(s)
And we can distribute the matrix C to give us our answer:
Y(s) = C[sI − A]−1 X(0) + C[sI − A]−1 BU(s) + DU(s)
Now, if the system is relaxed, and therefore X(0) is 0, the ﬁrst term of this equation becomes
0. In this case, we can factor out a U(s) from the remaining two terms:
Y(s) = (C[sI − A]−1 B + D)U(s)
We can make the following substitution to obtain the Transfer Function Matrix, or more
simply, the Transfer Matrix, H(s):
[Transfer Matrix]
C[sI − A]−1 B + D = H(s)
And rewrite our output equation in terms of the transfer matrix as follows:
[Transfer Matrix Description]
Y(s) = H(s)U(s)
If Y(s) and X(s) are 1 × 1 vectors (a SISO system), then we have our external description:
Y (s) = H(s)X(s)
Now, since X(s) = X(s), and Y(s) = Y(s), then H(s) must be equal to H(s). These are
simply two diﬀerent ways to describe the same exact equation, the same exact system.

17.3.1 Dimensions
If our system has q inputs, and r outputs, our transfer function matrix will be an r ×
q matrix.

143

MIMO Systems

17.3.2 Relation to Transfer Function
For SISO systems, the Transfer Function matrix will reduce to the transfer function as
would be obtained by taking the Laplace transform of the system response equation.
For MIMO systems, with n inputs and m outputs, the transfer function matrix will contain
n × m transfer functions, where each entry is the transfer function relationship between
each individual input, and each individual output.
Through this derivation of the transfer function matrix, we have shown the equivalency
between the Laplace methods and the State-Space method for representing systems. Also,
we have shown how the Laplace method can be generalized to account for MIMO systems.
Through the rest of this explanation, we will use the Laplace and State Space methods
interchangeably, opting to use one or the other where appropriate.

17.3.3 Zero-State and Zero-Input
If we have our complete system response equation from above:
Y(s) = C[sI − A]−1 x(0) + (C[sI − A]−1 B + D)U(s)
We can separate this into two separate parts:
• C[sI − A]−1 X(0) The Zero-Input Response.
• (C[sI − A]−1 B + D)U(s) The Zero-State Response.
These are named because if there is no input to the system (zero-input), then the output
is the response of the system to the initial system state. If there is no state to the system,
then the output is the response of the system to the system input. The complete response
is the sum of the system with no input, and the input with no state.

17.4 Discrete MIMO Systems
In the discrete case, we end up with similar equations, except that the X(0) initial conditions
term is preceded by an additional z variable:
X(z) = [zI − A]−1 zX(0) + [zI − A]−1 BU(z)
Y(z) = C[zI − A]−1 zX(0) + C[zI − A]−1 BU(z) + DU(z)
If X(0) is zero, that term drops out, and we can derive a Transfer Function Matrix in the
Z domain as well:
Y(z) = (C[zI − A]−1 B + D)U(z)
[Transfer Matrix]

144

Discrete MIMO Systems

C[zI − A]−1 B + D = H(z)
[Transfer Matrix Description]
Y(z) = H(z)U(z)

17.4.1 Example: Pulse Response
For digital systems, it is frequently a good idea to write the pulse response equation,
from the state-space equations:
x[k + 1] = Ax[k] + Bu[k]
y[k] = Cx[k] + Du[k]
We can combine these two equations into a single diﬀerence equation using the coefﬁcient matrices A, B, C, and D. To do this, we ﬁnd the ratio of the system output
vector, Y[n], to the system input vector, U[n]:
Y (z)
−1
U (z) = H(z) = C(zI − A) B + D

So the system response to a digital system can be derived from the pulse response
equation by:
Y (z) = H(z)U (z)
And we can set U(z) to a step input through the following Z transform:
z
u(t) ⇔ U (z) = z−1

Plugging this into our pulse response we get our step response:
Y (z) = (C(zI − A)−1 B + D)
(

Y(z) = H(z)

z
z−1

)

(

z
z−1

)

145

18 System Realization
18.1 Realization
Realization is the process of taking a mathematical model of a system (either in the
Laplace domain or the State-Space domain), and creating a physical system. Some systems
are not realizable.
An important point to keep in mind is that the Laplace domain representation, and the statespace representations are equivalent, and both representations describe the same physical
systems. We want, therefore, a way to convert between the two representations, because
each one is well suited for particular methods of analysis.
The state-space representation, for instance, is preferable when it comes time to move the
system design from the drawing board to a constructed physical device. For that reason, we
call the process of converting a system from the Laplace representation to the state-space
representation ”realization”.

18.2 Realization Conditions
Note:
Discrete systems G(z) are also realizable if these conditions are satisﬁed.
• A transfer function G(s) is realizable if and only if the system can be described by a
ﬁnite-dimensional state-space equation.
• (A B C D), an ordered set of the four system matrices, is called a realization of the
system G(s). If the system can be expressed as such an ordered quadruple, the system is
realizable.
• A system G is realizable if and only if the transfer matrix G(s) is a proper rational matrix.
In other words, every entry in the matrix G(s) (only 1 for SISO systems) is a rational
polynomial, and if the degree of the denominator is higher or equal to the degree of the
numerator.
We've already covered the method for realizing a SISO system, the remainder of this chapter
will talk about the general method of realizing a MIMO system.

18.3 Realizing the Transfer Matrix
We can decompose a transfer matrix G(s) into a strictly proper transfer matrix:

147

System Realization

G(s) = G(∞) + Gsp (s)
Where Gsp (s) is a strictly proper transfer matrix. Also, we can use this to ﬁnd the value of
our D matrix:
D = G(∞)
We can deﬁne d(s) to be the lowest common denominator polynomial of all the entries in
G(s):
Remember, q is the number of inputs, p is the number of internal system states, and r is
the number of outputs.

d(s) = sr + a1 sr−1 + · · · + ar−1 s + ar
Then we can deﬁne Gsp as:
Gsp (s) =

1
N (s)
d(s)

Where
N (s) = N1 sr−1 + · · · + Nr−1 s + Nr
And the Ni are p × q constant matrices.
If we remember our method for converting a transfer function to a state-space equation, we
can follow the same general method, except that the new matrix A will be a block matrix,
where each block is the size of the transfer matrix:


−a1 Ip −a2 Ip
 I
0
 p

0
I

p
A=
..
 ..
 .
.
0
0



· · · −ar−1 Ip −ar Ip
···
0
0 


···
0
0 
..
.. 

..
.
.
. 
···
Ip
0
 

Ip

0
 
 
0
B=
 
 .. 
.

0
[

]

C = Ip 0 0 · · · 0

148

19 Gain
19.1 What is Gain?
Gain is a proportional value that shows the relationship between the magnitude of the input
to the magnitude of the output signal at steady state. Many systems contain a method by
which the gain can be altered, providing more or less ”power” to the system. However,
increasing gain or decreasing gain beyond a particular safety zone can cause the system to
become unstable.
Consider the given second-order system:
T (s) =

1
s2 + 2s + 1

We can include an arbitrary gain term, K in this system that will represent an ampliﬁcation,
or a power increase:
1
T (s) = K 2
s + 2s + 1
In a state-space system, the gain term k can be inserted as follows:
x′ (t) = Ax(t) + kBu(t)

y(t) = Cx(t) + kDu(t)
The gain term can also be inserted into other places in the system, and in those cases the
equations will be slightly diﬀerent.

Figure 31

149

Gain

19.1.1 Example: Gain
Here are some good examples of arbitrary gain values being used in physical systems:
Volume Knob
On your stereo there is a volume knob that controls the gain of your ampliﬁer circuit.
Higher levels of volume (turning the volume ”up”) corresponds to higher ampliﬁcation
of the sound signal.
Gas Pedal
The gas pedal in your car is an example of gain. Pressing harder on the gas pedal
causes the engine to receive more gas, and causes the engine to output higher RPMs.
Brightness Buttons
Most computer monitors come with brightness buttons that control how bright the
screen image is. More brightness causes more power to be outputed to the screen.

19.2 Responses to Gain
As the gain to a system increases, generally the rise-time decreases, the percent overshoot
increases, and the settling time increases. However, these relationships are not always the
same. A critically damped system, for example, may decrease in rise time while not
experiencing any eﬀects of percent overshoot or settling time.

19.3 Gain and Stability
If the gain increases to a high enough extent, some systems can become unstable. We will
examine this eﬀect in the chapter on Root Locus. But it will decrease the steady state
error.

19.3.1 Conditional Stability
Systems that are stable for some gain values, and unstable for other values are called
conditionally stable systems. The stability is conditional upon the value of the gain, and
often the threshold where the system becomes unstable is important to ﬁnd.

150

20 Block Diagrams
When designing or analyzing a system, often it is useful to model the system graphically.
Block Diagrams are a useful and simple method for analyzing a system graphically. A
”block” looks on paper exactly what it means:

20.1 Systems in Series
When two or more systems are in series, they can be combined into a single representative
system, with a transfer function that is the product of the individual systems.

Figure 32

If we have two systems, f(t) and g(t), we can put them in series with one another so that
the output of system f(t) is the input to system g(t). Now, we can analyze them depending
on whether we are using our classical or modern methods.
If we deﬁne the output of the ﬁrst system as h(t), we can deﬁne h(t) as:
h(t) = x(t) ∗ f (t)
Now, we can deﬁne the system output y(t) in terms of h(t) as:
y(t) = h(t) ∗ g(t)
We can expand h(t):
y(t) = [x(t) ∗ f (t)] ∗ g(t)
But, since convolution is associative, we can re-write this as:
y(t) = x(t) ∗ [f (t) ∗ g(t)]

151

Block Diagrams
Our system can be simpliﬁed therefore as such:

Figure 33

20.1.1 Series Transfer Functions
If two or more systems are in series with one another, the total transfer function of the
series is the product of all the individual system transfer functions.

Figure 34

In the time-domain we know that:
y(t) = x(t) ∗ [f (t) ∗ g(t)]
But, in the frequency domain we know that convolution becomes multiplication, so we can
re-write this as:
Y (s) = X(s)[F (s)G(s)]
We can represent our system in the frequency domain as:

Figure 35

152

Systems in Series

20.1.2 Series State Space
If we have two systems in series (say system F and system G), where the output of F is the
input to system G, we can write out the state-space equations for each individual system.
System 1:
x′F = AF xF + BF u

yF = CF x F + D F u
System 2:
x′G = AG xG + BG yF

yG = CG xG + DG yF
And we can write substitute these equations together form the complete response of system
H, that has input u, and output yG :
[Series state equation]
[

]

[

x′G
AG B G C F
=
x′F
0
AF

][

]

[

]

xG
B D
+ G F u
xF
BF
[Series output equation]

[

]

[

yG
C
DG CF
= G
yF
0
CF

][

]

[

]

xG
D D
+ G F u
xF
DF

153

Block Diagrams

20.2 Systems in Parallel

Figure 36

Blocks may not be placed in parallel without the use of an adder. Blocks connected by an
adder as shown above have a total transfer function of:
Y (s) = X(s)[F (s) + G(s)]
Since the Laplace transform is linear, we can easily transfer this to the time domain by
converting the multiplication to convolution:
y(t) = x(t) ∗ [f (t) + g(t)]

Figure 37

20.3 State Space Model
The state-space equations, with non-zero A, B, C, and D matrices conceptually model the
following system:

154

State Space Model

Figure 38

In this image, the strange-looking block in the center is either an integrator or an ideal
delay, and can be represented in the transfer domain as:
1
1
s or z

Depending on the time characteristics of the system. If we only consider continuous-time
systems, we can replace the funny block in the center with an integrator:

Figure 39

20.3.1 In the Laplace Domain
The state space model of the above system, if A, B, C, and D are transfer functions A(s),
B(s), C(s) and D(s) of the individual subsystems, and if U(s) and Y(s) represent a single
input and output, can be written as follows:

155

Block Diagrams
(

)

Y (s)
1
= B(s)
C(s) + D(s)
U (s)
s − A(s)
We will explain how we got this result, and how we deal with feedforward and feedback
loop structures in the next chapter.

20.4 Adders and Multipliers
Some systems may have dedicated summation or multiplication devices, that automatically
add or multiply the transfer functions of multiple systems together

20.5 Simplifying Block Diagrams
Block diagrams can be systematically simpliﬁed. Note that this table is from Schaum's
Outline: Feedback and Controls Systems by DiStefano et al
Transformation

Equation

1

Y = (P1 P2 ) X

2

4

6

Cascaded Blocks
Combining Blocks in
Parallel

Y = P1 X ± P2 X

3

Removing a Block from a Forward
Loop

Equivalent Block
Diagram

Figure 40

Figure 41
Figure 43

Eliminating a Feedback Loop

Y = P1 (X ∓ P2 Y )

5

Removing a Block from a Feedback
Loop

Rearranging
Summing Junctions

Block Diagram

Y = P1 X ± P2 X
Figure 42

Figure 44
Figure 46

Y = P1 (X ∓ P2 Y )
Figure 45

Figure 47

Z = W ±X ±Y
Figure 49
Figure 48
Figure 50

7

8

156

Moving a Summing
Junction in front of a
Block

Z = PX ±Y

Moving a Summing
Junction beyond a
Block

Z = P (X ± Y )

Figure 51

Figure 52

Figure 53

Figure 54

External links
Transformation

Equation

9

Moving a Takeoﬀ
Point in front of a
Block

Y = PX

Moving a Takeoﬀ
Point beyond a Block

Y = PX

10

11

12

Moving a Takeoﬀ
Point in front of a
Summing Junction

Z = W ±X

Moving a Takeoﬀ
Point beyond a Summing Junction

Z = X ±Y

Block Diagram

Equivalent Block
Diagram

Figure 55

Figure 56

Figure 57

Figure 58

Figure 59

Figure 61

Figure 60

Figure 62

20.6 External links
• SISO Block Diagram with transfer functions on ControlTheoryPro.com1

1

http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Block_Diagram_Quick_Reference

157

21 Feedback Loops
21.1 Feedback
A feedback loop is a common and powerful tool when designing a control system. Feedback loops take the system output into consideration, which enables the system to adjust
its performance to meet a desired output response.
When talking about control systems it is important to keep in mind that engineers typically
are given existing systems such as actuators, sensors1 , motors, and other devices with set
parameters, and are asked to adjust the performance of those systems. In many cases, it may
not be possible to open the system (the ”plant”) and adjust it from the inside: modiﬁcations
need to be made external to the system to force the system response to act as desired. This
is performed by adding controllers, compensators, and feedback structures to the system.

21.2 Basic Feedback Structure

Figure 63

framed

w:Feedback2 This is a basic feedback structure. Here, we are using the output value of
the system to help us prepare the next output value. In this way, we can create systems
that correct errors. Here we see a feedback loop with a value of one. We call this a unity
feedback.
Here is a list of some relevant vocabulary, that will be used in the following
sections:
Plant

1
2

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Sensory%20Systems%2FVisual%20Signal%20Processing
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feedback

159

Feedback Loops
The term ”Plant” is a carry-over term from chemical engineering to refer to the main system
process. The plant is the preexisting system that does not (without the aid of a controller
or a compensator) meet the given speciﬁcations. Plants are usually given ”as is”, and are
not changeable. In the picture above, the plant is denoted with a P.
Controller
A controller, or a ”compensator” is an additional system that is added to the plant to
control the operation of the plant. The system can have multiple compensators, and they
can appear anywhere in the system: Before the pick-oﬀ node, after the summer, before or
after the plant, and in the feedback loop. In the picture above, our compensator is denoted
with a C.
Some texts, or texts in other disciplines may refer to a ”summer” as an adder.
Summer
A summer is a symbol on a system diagram, (denoted above with parenthesis) that conceptually adds two or more input signals, and produces a single sum output signal.
Pick-oﬀ node
A pickoﬀ node is simply a fancy term for a split in a wire.
Forward Path
The forward path in the feedback loop is the path after the summer, that travels through
the plant and towards the system output.
Reverse Path
The reverse path is the path after the pick-oﬀ node, that loops back to the beginning of
the system. This is also known as the ”feedback path”.
Unity feedback
When the multiplicative value of the feedback path is 1.

21.3 Negative vs Positive Feedback
It turns out that negative feedback is almost always the most useful type of feedback. When
we subtract the value of the output from the value of the input (our desired value), we get
a value called the error signal. The error signal shows us how far oﬀ our output is from
our desired input.
Positive feedback has the property that signals tend to reinforce themselves, and grow larger.
In a positive feedback system, noise from the system is added back to the input, and that in
turn produces more noise. As an example of a positive feedback system, consider an audio
ampliﬁcation system with a speaker and a microphone. Placing the microphone near the
speaker creates a positive feedback loop, and the result is a sound that grows louder and
louder. Because the majority of noise in an electrical system is high-frequency, the sound
output of the system becomes high-pitched.

160

Negative vs Positive Feedback

21.3.1 Example: State-Space Equation
In the previous chapter, we showed you this picture:

Figure 64

Now, we will derive the I/O relationship into the state-space equations. If we examine
the inner-most feedback loop, we can see that the forward path has an integrator system,
1
s , and the feedback loop has the matrix value A. If we take the transfer function only
of this loop, we get:
1

1
Tinner (s) = 1−s1 A = s−A
s

Pre-multiplying by the factor B, and post-multiplying by C, we get the transfer function
of the entire lower-half of the loop:
(

Tlower (s) = B

1
s−A

)

C

We can see that the upper path (D) and the lower-path Tlower are added together to
produce the ﬁnal result:
(

Ttotal (s) = B

1
s−A

)

C +D

Now, for an alternate method, we can assume that x' is the value of the inner-feedback
loop, right before the integrator. This makes sense, since the integral of x' should be
x (which we see from the diagram that it is. Solving for x', with an input of u, we get:
x′ = Ax + Bu
This is because the value coming from the feedback branch is equal to the value x times
the feedback loop matrix A, and the value coming from the left of the sumer is the
input u times the matrix B.
If we keep things in terms of x and u, we can see that the system output is the sum of
u times the feed-forward value D, and the value of x times the value C:
y = Cx + Du

161

Feedback Loops

These last two equations are precisely the state-space equations of our system.

21.4 Feedback Loop Transfer Function
We can solve for the output of the system by using a series of equations:
E(s) = X(s) − Y (s)
Y (s) = G(s)E(s)
and when we solve for Y(s) we get:
[Feedback Transfer Function]
Y (s) = X(s)

Gp(s)
1 + Gp(s)

The reader is encouraged to use the above equations to derive the result by themselves.
The function E(s) is known as the error signal. The error signal is the diﬀerence between
the system output (Y(s)), and the system input (X(s)). Notice that the error signal is now
the direct input to the system G(s). X(s) is now called the reference input. The purpose
of the negative feedback loop is to make the system output equal to the system input, by
identifying large diﬀerences between X(s) and Y(s) and correcting for them.

21.4.1 Example: Elevator
Here is a simple example of reference inputs and feedback systems:
There is an elevator in a certain building with 5 ﬂoors. Pressing button ”1” will take
you to the ﬁrst ﬂoor, and pressing button ”5” will take you to the ﬁfth ﬂoor, etc. For
reasons of simplicity, only one button can be pressed at a time.
Pressing a particular button is the reference input of the system. Pressing ”1” gives
the system a reference input of 1, pressing ”2” gives the system a reference input of 2,
etc. The elevator system then, tries to make the output (the physical ﬂoor location of
the elevator) match the reference input (the button pressed in the elevator). The error
signal, e(t), represents the diﬀerence between the reference input x(t), and the physical
location of the elevator at time t, y(t).
Let's say that the elevator is on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, and the button ”5” is pressed at time t0 .
The reference input then becomes a step function:
x(t) = 5u(t − t0 )
Where we are measuring in units of ”ﬂoors”. At time t0 , the error signal is:

162

Feedback Loop Transfer Function

e(t0 ) = x(t0 ) − y(t0 ) = 5 − 1 = 4
Which means that the elevator needs to travel upwards 4 more ﬂoors. At time t1 , when
the elevator is at the second ﬂoor, the error signal is:
e(t1 ) = x(t1 ) − y(t1 ) = 5 − 2 = 3
Which means the elevator has 3 more ﬂoors to go. Finally, at time t4 , when the elevator
reaches the top, the error signal is:
e(t4 ) = x(t4 ) − y(t4 ) = 5 − 5 = 0
And when the error signal is zero, the elevator stops moving. In essence, we can deﬁne
three cases:
• e(t) is positive: In this case, the elevator goes up one ﬂoor, and checks again.
• e(t) is zero: The elevator stops.
• e(t) is negative: The elevator goes down one ﬂoor, and checks again.

21.4.2 State-Space Feedback Loops
In the state-space representation, the plant is typically deﬁned by the state-space equations:
x′ (t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)

y(t) = Cx(t) + Du(t)
The plant is considered to be pre-existing, and the matrices A, B, C, and D are considered
to be internal to the plant (and therefore unchangeable). Also, in a typical system, the state
variables are either ﬁctional (in the sense of dummy-variables), or are not measurable. For
these reasons, we need to add external components, such as a gain element, or a feedback
element to the plant to enhance performance.
Consider the addition of a gain matrix K installed at the input of the plant, and a negative
feedback element F that is multiplied by the system output y, and is added to the input
signal of the plant. There are two cases:
1. The feedback element F is subtracted from the input before multiplication of the K
gain matrix.
2. The feedback element F is subtracted from the input after multiplication of the K
gain matrix.
In case 1, the feedback element F is added to the input before the multiplicative gain is
applied to the input. If v is the input to the entire system, then we can deﬁne u as:
u(t) = F v(t) − F Ky(t)

163

Feedback Loops
In case 2, the feeback element F is subtracted from the input after the multiplicative gain
is applied to the input. If v is the input to the entire system, then we can deﬁne u as:
u(t) = Kv(t) − F y(t)

21.5 Open Loop vs Closed Loop

Figure 65

Let's say that we have the generalized system shown above. The top part, Gp(s) represents
all the systems and all the controllers on the forward path. The bottom part, Gb(s) represents all the feedback processing elements of the system. The letter ”K” in the beginning of
the system is called the Gain. We will talk about the gain more in later chapters. We can
deﬁne the Closed-Loop Transfer Function as follows:
[Closed-Loop Transfer Function]
Hcl (s) =

KGp(s)
1 + Gp(s)Gb(s)

If we ”open” the loop, and break the feedback node, we can deﬁne the Open-Loop Transfer
Function, as:
[Open-Loop Transfer Function]
Hol (s) = KGp(s)
We can redeﬁne the closed-loop transfer function in terms of this open-loop transfer function:
Hcl (s) =

Hol (s)
1 + Gp(s)Gb(s)

These results are important, and they will be used without further explanation or derivation
throughout the rest of the book.

164

Second-Order Systems

21.6 Placement of a Controller
There are a number of diﬀerent places where we could place an additional controller.

Figure 66
1. In front of the system, before the feedback loop.
2. Inside the feedback loop, in the forward path, before the plant.
3. In the forward path, after the plant.
4. In the feedback loop, in the reverse path.
5. After the feedback loop.

Each location has certain beneﬁts and problems, and hopefully we will get a chance to talk
about all of them.

21.7 Second-Order Systems
The general expression of the transfer function of a second order system is given as:
2
ωn
2
s2 +2ζωn s+ωn

where ζ and ωn are damping ratio and natural frequency of the system respectively.

21.7.1 Damping Ratio
The damping ratio is deﬁned by way of the sign ζ. The damping ratio gives us an idea
about the nature of the transient response detailing the amount of overshoot & oscillation
that the system will undergo. This is completely regardless of time scaling.
If :
• ζ = zero, the system is undamped;
• ζ < 1, the system is underdamped;
• ζ = 1, the system is critically damped;
• ζ > 1, the system is overdamped.

165

Feedback Loops
ζ is used in conjunction with the natural frequency to determine system properties. To ﬁnd
the zeta value you must ﬁrst ﬁnd the natural response!

21.7.2 Natural Frequency
Natural Frequency, denoted by ωn is deﬁned as the frequency with which the system would
oscillate if it were not damped and we deﬁne the damping ratio as ζ = ωσn .

21.8 System Sensitivity

166

22 Signal Flow Diagrams
22.1 Signal-ﬂow graphs
w:Signal-ﬂow graph1 Signal-ﬂow graphs are another method for visually representing
a system. Signal Flow Diagrams are especially useful, because they allow for particular
methods of analysis, such as Mason's Gain Formula.
Signal ﬂow diagrams typically use curved lines to represent wires and systems, instead of
using lines at right-angles, and boxes, respectively. Every curved line is considered to have a
multiplier value, which can be a constant gain value, or an entire transfer function. Signals
travel from one end of a line to the other, and lines that are placed in series with one another
have their total multiplier values multiplied together (just like in block diagrams).
Signal ﬂow diagrams help us to identify structures called ”loops” in a system, which can be
analyzed individually to determine the complete response of the system.

1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signal-flow%20graph

167

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 67

An example of a signal ﬂow diagram.

22.1.1 Forward Paths
A forward path is a path in the signal ﬂow diagram that connects the input to the output
without touching any single node or path more than once. A single system can have multiple
forward paths.

22.1.2 Loops
A loop is a structure in a signal ﬂow diagram that leads back to itself. A loop does not
contain the beginning and ending points, and the end of the loop is the same node as the
beginning of a loop.
Loops are said to touch if they share a node or a line in common.
The Loop gain is the total gain of the loop, as you travel from one point, around the loop,
back to the starting point.

168

Examples

22.1.3 Delta Values
The Delta value of a system, denoted with a Greek ∆ is computed as follows:
∆ = 1 − A + B − C + D − E + F...... + ∞
Where:
• A is the sum of all individual loop gains
• B is the sum of the products of all the pairs of non-touching loops
• C is the sum of the products of all the sets of 3 non-touching loops
• D is the sum of the products of all the sets of 4 non-touching loops
• et cetera.
If the given system has no pairs of loops that do not touch, for instance, B and all additional
letters after B will be zero.

22.1.4 Mason's Rule
Mason's rule is a rule for determining the gain of a system. Mason's rule can be used with
block diagrams, but it is most commonly (and most easily) used with signal ﬂow diagrams.
w:Mason's rule2
If we have computed our delta values (above), we can then use Mason's Gain Rule to
ﬁnd the complete gain of the system:
[Mason's Rule]

M=

N
yout ∑
Mk ∆ k
=
yin
∆
k=1

Where M is the total gain of the system, represented as the ratio of the output gain (yout )
to the input gain (yin ) of the system. Mk is the gain of the kth forward path, and ∆k is the
loop gain of the kth loop.

22.2 Examples
22.2.1 Solving a signal-ﬂow graph by systematic reduction : Two
interlocking loops
This example shows how a system of ﬁve equations in ﬁve unknowns is solved using systematic reduction rules. The independent variable is xin . The dependent variables are x1 ,
x2 , x3 , x4 , xout . The coeﬃcients are labeled a, b, c, d, e. Here is the starting ﬂowgraph:

2

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mason%27s%20rule

169

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 68

upright=2

x1 = xin + ex3
x2 = bx1 + ax4
x3 = cx2
x4 = dx3
xout = x4
The steps for solving xout follow.
Removing edge c from x2 to x3

Figure 69

upright=2

x1 = xin + ex3
x2 = bx1 + ax4
x3 = cx2
x3 = c(bx1 + ax4 )
x3 = bcx1 + cax4
x4 = dx3
xout = x4

170

Examples

Figure 70

upright=2

Removing node x2 and its inﬂows
x2 has no outﬂows, and is not a node of interest.

Figure 71

upright=2

Figure 72

upright=2

171

Signal Flow Diagrams
Removing edge e from x3 to x1

Figure 73

upright=2

x1 = xin + ex3
x1 = xin + e(bcx1 + cax4 )
x1 = xin + bcex1 + acex4
x2 = bx1 + ax4
x3 = bcx1 + cax4
x4 = dx3
xout = x4

Figure 74

172

upright=2

Examples
Remove edge d from x3 to x4

Figure 75

upright=2

x1 = xin + acex4 + bcex1
x3 = bcx1 + acx4
x4 = dx3
x4 = d(bcx1 + acx4 )
x4 = bcdx1 + acdx4
xout = x4
Node x3 has no outﬂows and is not a node of interest. It is deleted along with its inﬂows.
x1 = xin + acex4 + bcex1
x4 = bcdx1 + acdx4
xout = x4

173

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 76

upright=2

Removing self-loop at x1

Figure 77

upright=2

x1 = xin + acex4 + bcex1
x1 (1 − bce) = xin + acex4
1
ace
x1 =
xin +
x4
1 − bce
1 − bce
x4 = bcdx1 + acdx4
xout = x4

174

Examples

Figure 78

upright=2

Removing self-loop at x4

Figure 79

upright=2

1
ace
xin +
x4
1 − bce
1 − bce
x4 = bcdx1 + acdx4
x1 =

x4 (1 − acd) = bcdx1
bcd
x4 =
x1
1 − acd
xout = x4

175

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 80

upright=2

Remove edge from x4 to x1

Figure 81

upright=2

1
ace
xin +
x4
1 − bce
1 − bce
1
ace
bcd
x1 =
xin +
×
x1
1 − bce
1 − bce 1 − acd
bcd
x1
x4 =
1 − acd
xout = x4
x1 =

176

Examples
Remove outﬂow from x4 to xout
1
ace
bcd
xin +
×
x1
1 − bce
1 − bce 1 − acd
bcd
xout =
x1
1 − acd
x1 =

x4 's outﬂow is then eliminated: xout is connected directly to x1 using the product of the
gains from the two edges replaced.
x4 is not a variable of interest; thus, its node and its inﬂows are eliminated.

Figure 82

upright=2

Eliminating self-loop at x1
1
ace
bcd
xin +
×
x1
1 − bce
1 − bce 1 − acd
ace
bcd
1
x1 (1 −
×
)=
xin
1 − bce 1 − acd
1 − bce
1
x1 =
xin
ace
bcd
(1 − bce) × (1 − 1−bce
× 1−acd
)
bcd
xout =
x1
1 − acd
x1 =

177

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 83

upright=2

Figure 84

upright=2

Eliminating outﬂow from x1, then eliminating x1 and its inﬂows

Figure 85

178

upright=2

Examples

1
xin
ace
bcd
(1 − bce) × (1 − 1−bce
× 1−acd
)
bcd
xout =
x1
1 − acd
bcd
1
xout =
×
xin
ace
bcd
1 − acd (1 − bce) × (1 − 1−bce
× 1−acd
)
x1 =

x1 is not a variable of interest; x1 and its inﬂows are eliminated
xout =

Figure 86

1
bcd
×
xin
ace
bcd
1 − acd (1 − bce) × (1 − 1−bce
× 1−acd
)

upright=2

Simplifying the gain expression
xout =

−bcd
xin
bce + acd − 1

Figure 87

upright=2

22.2.2 Solving a signal-ﬂow graph by systematic reduction: Three
equations in three unknowns
This example shows how a system of three equations in three unknowns is solved using systematic reduction rules. The independent variables are y1 , y2 , y3 . The dependent variables
are x1 , x2 , x3 . The coeﬃcients are labeled cjk . The steps for solving x1 follow:

179

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 88

180

upright=2

Examples

Figure 89

upright=2

181

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 90

upright=2

Figure 91

upright=2

182

Examples

Figure 92

upright=2

183

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 93

184

upright=2

Examples

Figure 94

upright=2

185

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 95

186

upright=2

Examples

Figure 96

upright=2

187

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 97

188

upright=2

Examples

Figure 98

upright=2

189

Signal Flow Diagrams

Figure 99

190

upright=2

Examples

Figure 100

upright=2

191

Signal Flow Diagrams

22.3 Electrical engineering: Construction of a ﬂow graph
for a RC circuit

Figure 101

This illustration shows the physical connections of the circuit. Independent voltage source
S is connected in series with a resistor R and capacitor C. The example is developed from
the physical circuit equations and solved using signal-ﬂow graph techniques. Polarity is
important:
• S is a source with the positive terminal at N1 and the negative terminal at N3
• R is a resistor with the positive terminal at N1 and the negative terminal at N2
• C is a capacitor with the positive terminal at N2 and the negative terminal at N3 .
The unknown variable of interest is the voltage across capacitor C.
Approach to the solution:
• Find the set of equations from the physical network. These equations are acausal in
nature.
• Branch equations for the capacitor and resistor. The equations will be developed as
transfer functions using Laplace transforms.
• Kirchhoﬀ's voltage and current laws
• Build a signal-ﬂow graph from the equations.
• Solve the signal-ﬂow graph.

192

Electrical engineering: Construction of a ﬂow graph for a RC circuit

22.3.1 Branch equations

Figure 102

The branch equations are shown for R and C.
Resistor R (Branch equation BR )
The resistor's branch equation in the time domain is:
VR (t) = RIR (t)
In the Laplace-transformed signal space:
VR (s) = RIR (s)
Capacitor C (Branch equation BC )
The capacitor's branch equation in the time domain is:

193

Signal Flow Diagrams

QC (t)
1
VC (t) =
=
C
C

∫ t

IC (τ )dτ + VC (t0 )
t0

Assuming the capacitor is initially discharged, the equation becomes:
QC (t)
1
VC (t) =
=
C
C

∫ t

IC (τ )dτ
t0

Taking the derivative of this and multiplying by C yields the derivative form:
IC (t) =

dVC (t)
dQ(t)
=C
dt
dt

In the Laplace-transformed signal space:
IC (s) = VC (s)sC

22.3.2 Kirchhoﬀ's laws equations

Figure 103

194

Electrical engineering: Construction of a ﬂow graph for a RC circuit
Kirchhoﬀ's Voltage Law equation KVL1
This circuit has only one independent loop. Its equation in the time domain is:
VR (t) + VC (t) − VS (t) = 0
In the Laplace-transformed signal space:
VR (s) + VC (s) − VS (s) = 0
Kirchhoﬀ's Current Law equations KCL1 , KCL2 , KCL3
The circuit has three nodes, thus three Kirchhoﬀ's current equations (expresses here as the
currents ﬂowing from the nodes):
IS (t) + IR (t) = 0 (KCL1 )
IC (t) − IR (t) = 0 (KCL2 )
IS (t) − IC (t) = 0 (KCL3 )
In the Laplace-transformed signal space:
IS (s) + IR (s) = 0 (KCL1 )
IC (s) − IR (s) = 0 (KCL2 )
IS (s) − IC (s) = 0 (KCL3 )
A set of independent equations must be chosen. For the current laws, it is necessary to
drop one of these equations. In this example, let us choose KCL1 , KCL2 .

22.3.3 Building the signal-ﬂow graph
We then look at the inventory of equations, and the signals that each equation relates:
Equation
BC
BR
KVL1
KCL1
KCL2

Signals
VC , I C
VR , IR
VR , VC , VS
IS , IR
IR , IC

The next step consists in assigning to each equation a signal that will be represented as a
node. Each independent source signal is represented in the signal-ﬂow graph as a source
node, therefore no equation is assigned to the independent source VS . There are many
possible valid signal ﬂow graphs from this set of equations. An equation must only be used
once, and the variables of interest must be represented.

195

Signal Flow Diagrams
Equation
BC
BR
KVL1
KCL1
KCL2

Signals
VC , IC
VR , IR
VR , VC , VS
IS , IR
IR , IC

Assigned signal node
IC
VR
VC
IS
IR

22.3.4 The resulting ﬂow graph is then drawn

Figure 104

The next step consists in solving the signal-ﬂow graph.
Using either Mason or systematic reduction, the resulting signal ﬂow graph is:

196

Electrical engineering: Construction of a ﬂow graph for a RC circuit

Figure 105

197

Signal Flow Diagrams

22.3.5 Mechatronics example

Figure 106 Angular position servo and signal ﬂow graph. θC = desired angle
command, θL = actual load angle, KP = position loop gain, VωC = velocity command,
VωM = motor velocity sense voltage, KV = velocity loop gain, VIC = current command,
VIM = current sense voltage, KC = current loop gain, VA = power ampliﬁer output
voltage, LM = motor inductance, VM = voltage across motor inductance, IM = motor
current, RM = motor resistance, RS = current sense resistance, KM = motor torque
constant (Nm/amp) , T = torque, M = momment of inertia of all rotating components α
= angular acceleration, ω = angular velocity, β = mechanical damping, GM = motor back
EMF constant, GT = tachometer conversion gain constant,. There is one forward path
(shown in a diﬀerent color) and six feedback loops. The drive shaft assumed to be stiﬀ
enough to not treat as a spring. Constants are shown in black and variables in purple.

198

23 Bode Plots
23.1 Bode Plots
A Bode Plot is a useful tool that shows the gain and phase response of a given LTI system
for diﬀerent frequencies. Bode Plots are generally used with the Fourier Transform of a
given system.

Figure 107 An example of a Bode magnitude and phase plot set. The Magnitude plot
is typically on the top, and the Phase plot is typically on the bottom of the set.

The frequency of the bode plots are plotted against a logarithmic frequency axis. Every
tickmark on the frequency axis represents a power of 10 times the previous value. For
instance, on a standard Bode plot, the values of the markers go from (0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000,
...) Because each tickmark is a power of 10, they are referred to as a decade. Notice that
the ”length” of a decade decreases as you move to the right on the graph. (note that this

199

Bode Plots
description doesn't match the chart above... there are 10 tickmarks per decade, not one,
but since it is a log chart they are not evenly spaced).
The bode Magnitude plot measures the system Input/Output ratio in special units called
decibels. The Bode phase plot measures the phase shift in degrees (typically, but radians
are also used).

23.1.1 Decibels
A Decibel is a ratio between two numbers on a logarithmic scale. To express a ratio
between two numbers (A and B) as a decibel we apply the following formula for numbers
that represent amplitudes (numbers that represent a power measurement use a factor of 10
rather than 20):
(

A
dB = 20 log
B

)

Where dB is the decibel result.
Or, if we just want to take the decibels of a single number C, we could just as easily write:
dB = 20 log(C)

23.1.2 Frequency Response Notations
If we have a system transfer function T(s), we can separate it into a numerator polynomial
N(s) and a denominator polynomial D(s). We can write this as follows:
T (s) =

N (s)
D(s)

To get the magnitude gain plot, we must ﬁrst transit the transfer function into the frequency
response by using the change of variables:
s = jω
From here, we can say that our frequency response is a composite of two parts, a real part
R and an imaginary part X:
T (jω) = R(ω) + jX(ω)
We will use these forms below.

200

Bode Gain Plots

23.1.3 Straight-Line Approximations
The Bode magnitude and phase plots can be quickly and easily approximated by using a
series of straight lines. These approximate graphs can be generated by following a few short,
simple rules (listed below). Once the straight-line graph is determined, the actual Bode plot
is a smooth curve that follows the straight lines, and travels through the breakpoints.

23.1.4 Break Points
If the frequency response is in pole-zero form:
∏

|jω + zn |
m |jω + pm |

T (jω) = ∏ n

We say that the values for all zn and pm are called break points of the Bode plot. These
are the values where the Bode plots experience the largest change in direction.
Break points are sometimes also called ”break frequencies”, ”cutoﬀ points”, or ”corner points”.

23.2 Bode Gain Plots
Bode Gain Plots, or Bode Magnitude Plots display the ratio of the system gain at
each input frequency.

23.2.1 Bode Gain Calculations
The magnitude of the transfer function T is deﬁned as:
|T (jω)| =

√

R2 + X 2

However, it is frequently diﬃcult to transition a function that is in ”numerator/denominator”
form to ”real+imaginary” form. Luckily, our decibel calculation comes in handy. Let's
say we have a frequency response deﬁned as a fraction with numerator and denominator
polynomials deﬁned as:
∏
|jω + zn |
T (jω) = ∏ n

m |jω + pm |

If we convert both sides to decibels, the logarithms from the decibel calculations convert
multiplication of the arguments into additions, and the divisions into subtractions:
Gain =

∑
n

20 log(|jω + zn |) −

∑

20 log(|jω + pm |)

m

And calculating out the gain of each term and adding them together will give the gain of
the system at that frequency.

201

Bode Plots

23.2.2 Bode Gain Approximations
The slope of a straight line on a Bode magnitude plot is measured in units of dB/Decade,
because the units on the vertical axis are dB, and the units on the horizontal axis are
decades.
The value ω = 0 is inﬁnitely far to the left of the bode plot (because a logarithmic scale
never reaches zero), so ﬁnding the value of the gain at ω = 0 essentially sets that value to
be the gain for the Bode plot from all the way on the left of the graph up till the ﬁrst break
point. The value of the slope of the line at ω = 0 is 0 dB/Decade.
From each pole break point, the slope of the line decreases by 20 dB/Decade. The line is
straight until it reaches the next break point. From each zero break point the slope of the
line increases by 20 dB/Decade. Double, triple, or higher amounts of repeat poles and zeros
aﬀect the gain by multiplicative amounts. Here are some examples:
• 2 poles: -40 dB/Decade
• 10 poles: -200 dB/Decade
• 5 zeros: +100 dB/Decade

23.3 Bode Phase Plots
Bode phase plots are plots of the phase shift to an input waveform dependent on the frequency characteristics of the system input. Again, the Laplace transform does not account
for the phase shift characteristics of the system, but the Fourier Transform can. The phase
of a complex function, in ”real+imaginary” form is given as:
∠T (jω) = tan

−1

(

X
R

)

23.4 Bode Procedure
Given a frequency response in pole-zero form:
∏
|jω + zn |
∏
T (jω) = A n

m |jω + pm |

Where A is a non-zero constant (can be negative or positive).
Here are the steps involved in sketching the approximate Bode magnitude plots:
Bode Magnitude Plots
Step 1
Factor the transfer function into pole-zero form.
Step 2

202

Bode Procedure

Find the frequency response from the Transfer function.
Step 3
Use logarithms to separate the frequency response into a sum of decibel terms
Step 4
Use ω = 0 to ﬁnd the starting magnitude.
Step 5
The locations of every pole and every zero are called break points. At a zero breakpoint, the slope of the line increases by 20dB/Decade. At a pole, the slope of the line
decreases by 20dB/Decade.
Step 6
At a zero breakpoint, the value of the actual graph diﬀers from the value of the straightline graph by 3dB. A zero is +3dB over the straight line, and a pole is -3dB below the
straight line.
Step 7
Sketch the actual bode plot as a smooth-curve that follows the straight lines of the
previous point, and travels through the breakpoints.
Here are the steps to drawing the Bode phase plots:
Bode Phase Plots
Step 1
If A is positive, start your graph (with zero slope) at 0 degrees. If A is negative, start
your graph with zero slope at 180 degrees (or -180 degrees, they are the same thing).
Step 2
For every zero, slope the line up at 45 degrees per decade when ω = z10n (1 decade before
the break frequency). Multiple zeros means the slope is steeper.
Step 3
m
For every pole, slope the line down at 45 degrees per decade when ω = p10
(1 decade
before the break frequency). Multiple poles means the slope is steeper.

Step 4
Flatten the slope again when the phase has changed by 90 degrees (for a zero) or -90
degrees (for a pole) (or larger values, for multiple poles or multiple zeros.

203

Bode Plots

23.5 Examples
23.5.1 Example: Constant Gain
Draw the bode plot of an ampliﬁer system, with a constant gain increase of 6dB.
Because the gain value is constant, and is not dependent on the frequency, we know
that the value of the magnitude graph is constant at all places on the graph. There are
no break points, so the slope of the graph never changes. We can draw the graph as a
straight, horizontal line at 6dB:

Figure 108

23.5.2 Example: Integrator
Draw the bode plot of a perfect integrator system given by the transfer function:
T (s) = 2s
First, we ﬁnd the frequency response of the system, by a change of variables:
2
T (jω) = jω

Then we convert our magnitude into logarithms:

204

Examples

Gain = 20 log(2) − 20 log(|jω|)
Notice that the location of the break point for the pole is located at ω → 0, which is
all the way to the left of the graph. Also, we notice that inserting 0 in for ω gives us an
undeﬁned value (which approaches negative inﬁnity, as the limit). We know, because
there is a single pole at zero, that the graph to the right of zero (which is everywhere)
has a slope of -20dB/Decade. We can determine from our magnitude calculation by
plugging in ω → 1 that the second term drops out, and the magnitude at that point
is 6dB. We now have the slope of the line, and a point that it intersects, and we can
draw the graph:

Figure 109

23.5.3 Example: Diﬀerentiator
T (jω) = 2jω

205

Bode Plots

Figure 110

23.5.4 Example: 1st Order, Low-pass Filter (1 Break Point)
−21.4
T (jω) = jω+144

206

Figure 111

Further reading

23.6 Further reading
• Bode plot online generator (real and asymptotic)1
• Circuit Theory/Bode Plots2
• Bode Plots on ControlTheoryPro.com3

1
2
3

http://www.onmyphd.com/?p=bode.plot
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Circuit%20Theory%2FBode%20Plots
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Bode_Plot

207

24 Nichols Charts
24.1 Nichols Charts
This page will talk about the use of Nichols charts to analyze frequency-domain characteristics of control systems.
w:Nichols plot1

1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nichols%20plot

209

25 Stability
25.1 Stability
When a system is unstable, the output of the system may be inﬁnite even though the input
to the system was ﬁnite. This causes a number of practical problems. For instance, a robot
arm controller that is unstable may cause the robot to move dangerously. Also, systems
that are unstable often incur a certain amount of physical damage, which can become costly.
Nonetheless, many systems are inherently unstable - a ﬁghter jet, for instance, or a rocket
at liftoﬀ, are examples of naturally unstable systems. Although we can design controllers
that stabilize the system, it is ﬁrst important to understand what stability is, how it is
determined, and why it matters.
The chapters in this section are heavily mathematical, and many require a background
in linear diﬀerential equations. Readers without a strong mathematical background might
want to review the necessary chapters in the Calculus1 and Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations2
books (or equivalent) before reading this material.
For most of this chapter we will be assuming that the system is linear, and can be represented
either by a set of transfer functions or in state space. Linear systems have an associated
characteristic polynomial, and this polynomial tells us a great deal about the stability of
the system. Negativeness of any coeﬃcient of a characteristic polynomial indicates that the
system is either unstable or at most marginally stable. If any coeﬃcient is zero/negative
then we can say that the system is unstable. It is important to note, though, that even if
all of the coeﬃcients of the characteristic polynomial are positive the system may still be
unstable. We will look into this in more detail below.

25.2 BIBO Stability
A system is deﬁned to be BIBO Stable if every bounded input to the system results in a
bounded output over the time interval [t0 , ∞). This must hold for all initial times to . So
long as we don't input inﬁnity to our system, we won't get inﬁnity output.
A system is deﬁned to be uniformly BIBO Stable if there exists a positive constant
k that is independent of t0 such that for all t0 the following conditions:
(t)∥ ≤ 1

1
2

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Calculus
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ordinary%20Differential%20Equations

211

Stability

t ≥ t0
implies that
(t)∥ ≤ k
There are a number of diﬀerent types of stability, and keywords that are used with the
topic of stability. Some of the important words that we are going to be discussing in this
chapter, and the next few chapters are: BIBO Stable, Marginally Stable, Conditionally Stable, Uniformly Stable, Asymptotically Stable, and Unstable. All of these
words mean slightly diﬀerent things.

25.3 Determining BIBO Stability
We can prove mathematically that a system f is BIBO stable if an arbitrary input x is
bounded by two ﬁnite but large arbitrary constants M and -M:
−M < x ≤ M
We apply the input x, and the arbitrary boundaries M and -M to the system to produce
three outputs:
yx = f (x)

yM = f (M )

y−M = f (−M )
Now, all three outputs should be ﬁnite for all possible values of M and x, and they should
satisfy the following relationship:
y−M ≤ yx ≤ yM
If this condition is satisﬁed, then the system is BIBO stable.
A SISO linear time-invariant (LTI) system is BIBO stable if and only if g(t) is absolutely
integrable from [0,∞] or from:
∫ ∞
0

212

|g(t)| dt ≤ M < ∞

Poles and Stability

25.3.1 Example
Consider the system:
h(t) = 2t
We can apply our test, selecting an arbitrarily large ﬁnite constant M, and an arbitrary
input x such that M>x>-M
As M approaches inﬁnity (but does not reach inﬁnity), we can show that:
2
y−M = limM →∞ −M
= 0−

And:
2
yM = limM →∞ M
= 0+

So now, we can write out our inequality:
y−M ≤ yx ≤ yM
0− ≤ x < 0+
And this inequality should be satisﬁed for all possible values of x. However, we can see
that when x is zero, we have the following:
yx = limx→0 x2 = ∞
Which means that x is between -M and M, but the value yx is not between y-M and
yM . Therefore, this system is not stable.

25.4 Poles and Stability
When the poles of the closed-loop transfer function of a given system are located in the
right-half of the S-plane (RHP), the system becomes unstable. When the poles of the
system are located in the left-half plane (LHP) and the system is not improper, the system
is shown to be stable. A number of tests deal with this particular facet of stability: The
Routh-Hurwitz Criteria, the Root-Locus, and the Nyquist Stability Criteria all
test whether there are poles of the transfer function in the RHP. We will learn about all
these tests in the upcoming chapters.
If the system is a multivariable, or a MIMO system, then the system is stable if and
only if every pole of every transfer function in the transfer function matrix has a negative
real part and every transfer function in the transfer function matrix is not improper. For
these systems, it is possible to use the Routh-Hurwitz, Root Locus, and Nyquist methods
described later, but these methods must be performed once for each individual transfer
function in the transfer function matrix.

213

Stability

25.5 Poles and Eigenvalues
Note:
Every pole of G(s) is an eigenvalue of the system matrix A. However, not every eigenvalue
of A is a pole of G(s).
The poles of the transfer function, and the eigenvalues of the system matrix A are related.
In fact, we can say that the eigenvalues of the system matrix A are the poles of the transfer
function of the system. In this way, if we have the eigenvalues of a system in the state-space
domain, we can use the Routh-Hurwitz, and Root Locus methods as if we had our system
represented by a transfer function instead.
On a related note, eigenvalues and all methods and mathematical techniques that use
eigenvalues to determine system stability only work with time-invariant systems. In systems
which are time-variant, the methods using eigenvalues to determine system stability fail.

25.6 Transfer Functions Revisited
We are going to have a brief refesher here about transfer functions, because several of the
later chapters will use transfer functions for analyzing system stability.
Let us remember our generalized feedback-loop transfer function, with a gain element of
K, a forward path Gp(s), and a feedback of Gb(s). We write the transfer function for this
system as:
Hcl (s) =

KGp(s)
1 + Hol (s)

Where Hcl is the closed-loop transfer function, and Hol is the open-loop transfer function.
Again, we deﬁne the open-loop transfer function as the product of the forward path and
the feedback elements, as such:
Hol (s) = KGp(s)Gb(s) <---Note this deﬁnition now contradicts the updated deﬁnition in
the ”Feedback” section.
Now, we can deﬁne F(s) to be the characteristic equation. F(s) is simply the denominator
of the closed-loop transfer function, and can be deﬁned as such:
[Characteristic Equation]
F (s) = 1 + Hol = D(s)
We can say conclusively that the roots of the characteristic equation are the poles of the
transfer function. Now, we know a few simple facts:
1. The locations of the poles of the closed-loop transfer function determine if the system
is stable or not

214

State-Space and Stability
2. The zeros of the characteristic equation are the poles of the closed-loop transfer function.
3. The characteristic equation is always a simpler equation than the closed-loop transfer
function.
These functions combined show us that we can focus our attention on the characteristic
equation, and ﬁnd the roots of that equation.

25.7 State-Space and Stability
As we have discussed earlier, the system is stable if the eigenvalues of the system matrix
A have negative real parts. However, there are other stability issues that we can analyze,
such as whether a system is uniformly stable, asymptotically stable, or otherwise. We will
discuss all these topics in a later chapter.

25.8 Marginal Stability
When the poles of the system in the complex S-Domain exist on the complex frequency
axis (the vertical axis), or when the eigenvalues of the system matrix are imaginary (no real
part), the system exhibits oscillatory characteristics, and is said to be marginally stable. A
marginally stable system may become unstable under certain circumstances, and may be
perfectly stable under other circumstances. It is impossible to tell by inspection whether a
marginally stable system will become unstable or not.
We will discuss marginal stability more in the following chapters.

215

26 Introduction to Digital Controls
26.1 Discrete-Time Stability
The stability analysis of a discrete-time or digital system is similar to the analysis for a
continuous time system. However, there are enough diﬀerences that it warrants a separate
chapter.

26.2 Input-Output Stability
26.2.1 Uniform Stability
An LTI causal system is uniformly BIBO stable if there exists a positive constant L such
that the following conditions:
x[n0 ] = 0
[n]∥ ≤ k
k≥0
imply that
[n]∥ ≤ L

26.2.2 Impulse Response Matrix
We can deﬁne the impulse response matrix of a discrete-time system as:
[Impulse Response Matrix]
{

G[n] =

CAk−1 B
0

if k > 0
if k ≤ 0

Or, in the general time-varying case:

217

Introduction to Digital Controls
{

G[n] =

Cϕ[n, n0 ]B
0

if k > 0
if k ≤ 0

A digital system is BIBO stable if and only if there exists a positive constant L such that
for all non-negative k:
k
∑

[n]∥ ≤ L

n=0

26.3 Stability of Transfer Function
A MIMO discrete-time system is BIBO stable if and only if every pole of every transfer
function in the transfer function matrix has a magnitude less than 1. All poles of all
transfer functions must exist inside the unit circle on the Z plane.

26.4 Lyapunov Stability
There is a discrete version of the Lyapunov stability theorem that applies to digital systems.
Given the discrete Lyapunov equation:
[Digital Lypapunov Equation]
AT M A − M = −N
We can use this version of the Lyapunov equation to deﬁne a condition for stability in
discrete-time systems:
Lyapunov Stability Theorem (Digital Systems)
A digital system with the system matrix A is asymptotically stable if and only if there
exists a unique matrix M that satisﬁes the Lyapunov Equation for every positive deﬁnite
matrix N.

26.5 Poles and Eigenvalues
Every pole of G(z) is an eigenvalue of the system matrix A. Not every eigenvalue of A is
a pole of G(z). Like the poles of the transfer function, all the eigenvalues of the system
matrix must have magnitudes less than 1. Mathematically:
√

Re(z)2 + Im(z)2 ≤ 1

If the magnitude of the eigenvalues of the system matrix A, or the poles of the transfer
functions are greater than 1, the system is unstable.

218

Finite Wordlengths

26.6 Finite Wordlengths
Digital computer systems have an inherent problem because implementable computer systems have ﬁnite wordlengths to deal with. Some of the issues are:
1. Real numbers can only be represented with a ﬁnite precision. Typically, a computer
system can only accurately represent a number to a ﬁnite number of decimal points.
2. Because of the fact above, computer systems with feedback can compound errors with
each program iteration. Small errors in one step of an algorithm can lead to large
errors later in the program.
3. Integer numbers in computer systems have ﬁnite lengths. Because of this, integer
numbers will either roll-over, or saturate, depending on the design of the computer
system. Both situations can create inaccurate results.

219

27 Routh-Hurwitz Criterion
27.1 Stability Criteria
The Routh-Hurwitz stability criterion provides a simple algorithm to decide whether or not
the zeros of a polynomial are all in the left half of the complex plane (such a polynomial
is called at times ”Hurwitz”). A Hurwitz polynomial is a key requirement for a linear
continuous-time invariant to be stable (all bounded inputs produce bounded outputs).
Necessary stability conditions
Conditions that must hold for a polynomial to be Hurwitz.
If any of them fails - the polynomial is not stable. However, they may all hold without
implying stability.
Suﬃcient stability conditions
Conditions that if met imply that the polynomial is stable. However, a polynomial may
be stable without implying some or any of them.
The Routh criteria provides condition that are both necessary and suﬃcient for a polynomial
to be Hurwitz.

27.2 Routh-Hurwitz Criteria
The Routh-Hurwitz criteria is comprised of three separate tests that must be satisﬁed. If
any single test fails, the system is not stable and further tests need not be performed. For
this reason, the tests are arranged in order from the easiest to determine to the hardest.
The Routh Hurwitz test is performed on the denominator of the transfer function, the
characteristic equation. For instance, in a closed-loop transfer function with G(s) in the
forward path, and H(s) in the feedback loop, we have:
T (s) =

G(s)
1 + G(s)H(s)

If we simplify this equation, we will have an equation with a numerator N(s), and a denominator D(s):
T (s) =

N (s)
D(s)

The Routh-Hurwitz criteria will focus on the denominator polynomial D(s).

221

Routh-Hurwitz Criterion

27.2.1 Routh-Hurwitz Tests
Here are the three tests of the Routh-Hurwitz Criteria. For convenience, we will use N as
the order of the polynomial (the value of the highest exponent of s in D(s)). The equation
D(s) can be represented generally as follows:
D(s) = a0 + a1 s + a2 s2 + · · · + aN sN
Rule 1
All the coeﬃcients ai must be present (non-zero)
Rule 2
All the coeﬃcients ai must be positive (equivalently all of them must be negative, with
no sign change)
Rule 3
If Rule 1 and Rule 2 are both satisﬁed, then form a Routh array from the coefﬁcients ai . There is one pole in the right-hand s-plane for every sign change of the
members in the ﬁrst column of the Routh array (any sign changes, therefore, mean the
system is unstable).
We will explain the Routh array below.

27.2.2 The Routh's Array
The Routh array is formed by taking all the coeﬃcients ai of D(s), and staggering them in
array form. The ﬁnal columns for each row should contain zeros:
sN

aN

sN −1 a

N −1

aN −2 · · · 0
aN −3 · · · 0

Therefore, if N is odd, the top row will be all the odd coeﬃcients. If N is even, the top row
will be all the even coeﬃcients. We can ﬁll in the remainder of the Routh Array as follows:
sN

aN

s0

bN −1
cN −1
···

sN −1 a

N −1

aN −2
aN −3
bN −3
cN −3

··· 0
··· 0
···
···

Now, we can deﬁne all our b, c, and other coeﬃcients, until we reach row s0 . To ﬁll them
in, we use the following formulae:

bN −1 =

222

−1
aN
aN −2
aN −1 aN −1 aN −3

Routh-Hurwitz Criteria
And

bN −3 =

−1
aN
aN −4
aN −1 aN −1 aN −5

For each row that we are computing, we call the left-most element in the row directly above
it the pivot element. For instance, in row b, the pivot element is aN-1 , and in row c, the
pivot element is bN-1 and so on and so forth until we reach the bottom of the array.
To obtain any element, we negate the determinant of the following matrix, and divide by
the pivot element:
k m
l n
Where:
• k is the left-most element two rows above the current row.
• l is the pivot element.
• m is the element two rows up, and one column to the right of the current element.
• n is the element one row up, and one column to the right of the current element.
In terms of k l m n, our equation is:
v=

(lm) − (kn)
l

27.2.3 Example: Calculating CN-3
To calculate the value CN-3 , we must determine the values for k l m and n:
• k is the left-most element two rows up: aN-1
• l the pivot element, is the left-most element one row up: bN-1
• m is the element from one-column to the right, and up two rows: aN-5
• n is the element one column right, and one row up: bN-5
Plugging this into our equation gives us the formula for CN-3 :
aN −1 bN −5 − bN −1 aN −5
−1 aN −1 aN −5
=
b
b
bN −1 N −1 N −5
−bN −1

27.2.4 Example: Stable Third Order System
We are given a system with the following characteristic equation:
D(s) = s3 + 2s2 + 4s + 3

223

Routh-Hurwitz Criterion

Using the ﬁrst two requirements, we see that all the coeﬃcients are non-zero, and all
of the coeﬃcients are positive. We will proceed then to construct the Routh-Array:
4
s3 1
2
s
2
3
s1 bN −1 bN −3
s0 cN −1 cN −3

0
0
0
0

And we can calculate out all the coeﬃcients:
bN −1 = (2)(4)−(1)(3)
= 52
2
=0
bN −3 = (2)(0)−(0)(1)
2
cN −1 =
cN −3 =

(3)( 52 )−(2)(0)
5
2

(2)(0)−( 52 )(0)
5
2

=3
=0

And ﬁlling these values into our Routh Array, we can determine whether the system is
stable:
s3 1
s2 2
s1 52
s0 3

4
3
0
0

0
0
0
0

From this array, we can clearly see that all of the signs of the ﬁrst column are positive,
there are no sign changes, and therefore there are no poles of the characteristic equation
in the RHP.

27.2.5 Special Case: Row of All Zeros
If, while calculating our Routh-Hurwitz, we obtain a row of all zeros, we do not stop, but
can actually learn more information about our system.
If we have a row of all zeros, the row directly above it is known as the Auxiliary Polynomial, and can be very helpful. The roots of the auxiliary polynomial give us the precise
locations of complex conjugate roots that lie on the jω axis. However, one important point
to notice is that if there are repeated roots on the jω axis, the system is actually unstable. Therefore, we must use the auxiliary polynomial to determine whether the roots are
repeated or not.
The auxiliary equation is to be diﬀerentiated with respect to s and the coeﬃcients of this
equation replaces the all zero row. Routh array can be further calculated using these new
values.

27.2.6 Special Case: Zero in the First Column
In this special case, there is a zero in the ﬁrst column of the Routh Array, but the other
elements of that row are non-zero. Like the above case, we can replace the zero with a

224

Routh-Hurwitz Criteria
small variable epsilon (ε) and use that variable to continue our calculations. After we have
constructed the entire array, we can take the limit as epsilon approaches zero to get our
ﬁnal values. If the sign coeﬃcient above the (ε) is the same as below it, this indicates a
pure imaginary root.

225

28 Jury's Test
28.1 Routh-Hurwitz in Digital Systems
Because of the diﬀerences in the Z and S domains, the Routh-Hurwitz criteria can not be
used directly with digital systems. This is because digital systems and continuous-time
systems have diﬀerent regions of stability. However, there are some methods that we can
use to analyze the stability of digital systems. Our ﬁrst option (and arguably not a very
good option) is to convert the digital system into a continuous-time representation using
the bilinear transform. The bilinear transform converts an equation in the Z domain
into an equation in the W domain, that has properties similar to the S domain. Another
possibility is to use Jury's Stability Test. Jury's test is a procedure similar to the RH
test, except it has been modiﬁed to analyze digital systems in the Z domain directly.

28.1.1 Bilinear Transform
One common, but time-consuming, method of analyzing the stability of a digital system
in the z-domain is to use the bilinear transform to convert the transfer function from the
z-domain to the w-domain. The w-domain is similar to the s-domain in the following ways:
• Poles in the right-half plane are unstable
• Poles in the left-half plane are stable
• Poles on the imaginary axis are partially stable
The w-domain is warped with respect to the s domain, however, and except for the relative
position of poles to the imaginary axis, they are not in the same places as they would be in
the s-domain.
Remember, however, that the Routh-Hurwitz criterion can tell us whether a pole is unstable
or not, and nothing else. Therefore, it doesn't matter where exactly the pole is, so long as
it is in the correct half-plane. Since we know that stable poles are in the left-half of the
w-plane and the s-plane, and that unstable poles are on the right-hand side of both planes,
we can use the Routh-Hurwitz test on functions in the w domain exactly like we can use it
on functions in the s-domain.

28.1.2 Other Mappings
There are other methods for mapping an equation in the Z domain into an equation in the
S domain, or a similar domain. We will discuss these diﬀerent methods in the Appendix1 .
1

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FZ%20Transform%20Mappings

227

Jury's Test

28.2 Jury's Test
Jury's test is a test that is similar to the Routh-Hurwitz criterion, except that it can be
used to analyze the stability of an LTI digital system in the Z domain. To use Jury's test to
determine if a digital system is stable, we must check our z-domain characteristic equation
against a number of speciﬁc rules and requirements. If the function fails any requirement,
it is not stable. If the function passes all the requirements, it is stable. Jury's test is a
necessary and suﬃcient test for stability in digital systems.
Again, we call D(z) the characteristic polynomial of the system. It is the denominator
polynomial of the Z-domain transfer function. Jury's test will focus exclusively on the
Characteristic polynomial. To perform Jury's test, we must perform a number of smaller
tests on the system. If the system fails any test, it is unstable.

28.2.1 Jury Tests
Given a characteristic equation in the form:
D(z) = a0 + a1 z + a2 z 2 + · · · + aN z N
The following tests determine whether this system has any poles outside the unit circle (the
instability region). These tests will use the value N as being the degree of the characteristic
polynomial.
The system must pass all of these tests to be considered stable. If the system fails any
test, you may stop immediately: you do not need to try any further tests.
Rule 1
If z is 1, the system output must be positive:
D(1) > 0
Rule 2
If z is -1, then the following relationship must hold:
(−1)N D(−1) > 0
Rule 3
The absolute value of the constant term (a0 ) must be less than the value of the highest
coeﬃcient (aN ):
|a0 | < aN
If Rule 1 Rule 2 and Rule 3 are satisiﬁed, construct the Jury Array (discussed
below).

228

Jury's Test

Rule 4
Once the Jury Array has been formed, all the following relationships must be satisifed
until the end of the array:
|b0 | > |bN −1 |
|c0 | > |cN −2 |
|d0 | > |dN −3 |
And so on until the last row of the array. If all these conditions are satisifed, the system
is stable.
While you are constructing the Jury Array, you can be making the tests of Rule 4. If
the Array fails Rule 4 at any point, you can stop calculating the array: your system is
unstable. We will discuss the construction of the Jury Array below.

28.2.2 The Jury Array
The Jury Array is constructed by ﬁrst writing out a row of coeﬃcients, and then writing
out another row with the same coeﬃcients in reverse order. For instance, if your polynomial
is a third order system, we can write the First two lines of the Jury Array as follows:
z0
a0
aN

z1 z2 z3 . . . zN
a1 a2 a3 . . . aN
. . . a3 a2 a1 a0

Now, once we have the ﬁrst row of our coeﬃcients written out, we add another row of coefﬁcients (we will use b for this row, and c for the next row, as per our previous convention),
and we will calculate the values of the lower rows from the values of the upper rows. Each
new row that we add will have one fewer coeﬃcient then the row before it:
1)
2)
3)
4)
..
.
2N − 3)

a0
aN
b0
bN −1
..
.

a1
...
b1
...
..
.

a2 a3
. . . aN
a 3 a2
a1
a0
b2 . . . bN −1
b2 b1
b0
..
.

v0

v1

v2

Note: The last ﬁle is the (2N-3) ﬁle, and always has 3 elements. This test doesn't have
sense if N=1, but in this case you know the pole!

229

Jury's Test
Once we get to a row with 2 members, we can stop constructing the array.
To calculate the values of the odd-number rows, we can use the following formulae. The
even number rows are equal to the previous row in reverse order. We will use k as an
arbitrary subscript value. These formulae are reusable for all elements in the array:

bk =

a0
aN

aN −k
ak

ck =

b0
bN −1−k
bN −1
bk

dk =

c0
cN −2−k
cN −2
ck

This pattern can be carried on to all lower rows of the array, if needed.

28.2.3 Example: Calculating e5
Give the equation for member e5 of the jury array (assuming the original polynomial is
suﬃciently large to require an e5 member).
Going oﬀ the pattern we set above, we can have this equation for a member e:
ek =

d0
dN −R−k
dN −R
dk

Where we are using R as the subtractive element from the above equations. Since row
c had R → 1, and row d had R → 2, we can follow the pattern and for row e set R →
3. Plugging this value of R into our equation above gives us:
ek =

d0
dN −3−k
dN −3
dk

And since we want e5 we know that k is 5, so we can substitute that into the equation:
e5 =

d0
dN −3

dN −3−5
d0
dN −8
=
d5
dN −3
d5

When we take the determinant, we get the following equation:
e5 = d0 d5 − dN −8 dN −3

28.3 Further reading
We will discuss the bilinear transform, and other methods to convert between the Laplace
domain and the Z domain in the appendix:

230

Further reading
• Z Transform Mappings2

2

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control%20Systems%2FZ%20Transform%20Mappings

231

29 Root Locus
29.1 The Problem
Consider a system like a radio. The radio has a ”volume” knob, that controls the amount
of gain of the system. High volume means more power going to the speakers, low volume
means less power to the speakers. As the volume value increases, the poles of the transfer
function of the radio change, and they might potentially become unstable. We would like to
ﬁnd out if the radio becomes unstable, and if so, we would like to ﬁnd out what values of the
volume cause it to become unstable. Our current methods would require us to plug in each
new value for the volume (gain, ”K”), and solve the open-loop transfer function for the roots.
This process can be a long one. Luckily, there is a method called the root-locus method,
that allows us to graph the locations of all the poles of the system for all values of gain, K

29.2 Root-Locus
As we change gain, we notice that the system poles and zeros actually move around in the
S-plane1 . This fact can make life particularly diﬃcult, when we need to solve higher-order
equations repeatedly, for each new gain value. The solution to this problem is a technique
known as Root-Locus graphs. Root-Locus allows you to graph the locations of the poles
and zeros for every value of gain, by following several simple rules. As we know that a fan
switch also can control the speed of the fan.
Let's say we have a closed-loop transfer function for a particular system:
N (s)
KG(s)
=
D(s) 1 + KG(s)H(s)
Where N is the numerator polynomial and D is the denominator polynomial of the transfer
functions, respectively. Now, we know that to ﬁnd the poles of the equation, we must set
the denominator to 0, and solve the characteristic equation. In other words, the locations
of the poles of a speciﬁc equation must satisfy the following relationship:
D(s) = 1 + KG(s)H(s) = 0
from this same equation, we can manipulate the equation as such:

1

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/S-plane

233

Root Locus

1 + KG(s)H(s) = 0
KG(s)H(s) = −1
And ﬁnally by converting to polar coordinates:
∠KG(s)H(s) = 180◦
Now we have 2 equations that govern the locations of the poles of a system for all gain
values:
[The Magnitude Equation]
1 + KG(s)H(s) = 0
[The Angle Equation]
∠KG(s)H(s) = 180◦

29.2.1 Digital Systems
The same basic method can be used for considering digital systems in the Z-domain:
N (z)
KG(z)
=
D(z) 1 + KGH(z)
Where N is the numerator polynomial in z, D is the denominator polynomial in z, and
GH(z) is the open-loop transfer function of the system, in the Z domain.
The denominator D(z), by the deﬁnition of the characteristic equation is equal to:
D(z) = 1 + KGH(z) = 0
We can manipulate this as follows:
1 + KGH(z) = 0

KGH(z) = −1
We can now convert this to polar coordinates, and take the angle of the polynomial:
∠KGH(z) = 180◦

234

The Root-Locus Procedure
We are now left with two important equations:
[The Magnitude Equation]
1 + KGH(z) = 0
[The Angle Equation]
∠KGH(z) = 180◦
If you will compare the two, the Z-domain equations are nearly identical to the S-domain
equations, and act exactly the same. For the remainder of the chapter, we will only consider
the S-domain equations, with the understanding that digital systems operate in nearly the
same manner.

29.3 The Root-Locus Procedure
Note:
In this section, the rules for the S-Plane and the Z-plane are the same, so we won't refer
to the diﬀerences between them.
In the transform domain (see note at right), when the gain is small, the poles start at the
poles of the open-loop transfer function. When gain becomes inﬁnity, the poles move to
overlap the zeros of the system. This means that on a root-locus graph, all the poles move
towards a zero. Only one pole may move towards one zero, and this means that there must
be the same number of poles as zeros.
If there are fewer zeros than poles in the transfer function, there are a number of implicit
zeros located at inﬁnity, that the poles will approach.
First thing, we need to convert the magnitude equation into a slightly more convenient
form:
KG(s)H(s) + 1 = 0 → G(s)H(s) =

−1
K

Note:
We generally use capital letters for functions in the frequency domain, but a(s) and
b(s) are unimportant enough to be lower-case.
Now, we can assume that G(s)H(s) is a fraction of some sort, with a numerator and a
denominator that are both polynomials. We can express this equation using arbitrary
functions a(s) and b(s), as such:
a(s) −1
=
b(s)
K

235

Root Locus
We will refer to these functions a(s) and b(s) later in the procedure.
We can start drawing the root-locus by ﬁrst placing the roots of b(s) on the graph with an
'X'. Next, we place the roots of a(s) on the graph, and mark them with an 'O'.

Poles are marked on the graph with an 'X' and zeros are marked with an 'O' by
common convention. These letters have no particular meaning
Next, we examine the real-axis. starting from the right-hand side of the graph and traveling
to the left, we draw a root-locus line on the real-axis at every point to the left of an odd
number of poles or zeros on the real-axis. This may sound tricky at ﬁrst, but it becomes
easier with practice.

Double poles or double zeros count as two.
Now, a root-locus line starts at every pole. Therefore, any place that two poles appear to
be connected by a root locus line on the real-axis, the two poles actually move towards each
other, and then they ”break away”, and move oﬀ the axis. The point where the poles break
oﬀ the axis is called the breakaway point. From here, the root locus lines travel towards
the nearest zero.
It is important to note that the s-plane is symmetrical about the real axis, so whatever is
drawn on the top-half of the S-plane, must be drawn in mirror-image on the bottom-half
plane.
Once a pole breaks away from the real axis, they can either travel out towards inﬁnity
(to meet an implicit zero), or they can travel to meet an explicit zero, or they can re-join
the real-axis to meet a zero that is located on the real-axis. If a pole is traveling towards
inﬁnity, it always follows an asymptote. The number of asymptotes is equal to the number
of implicit zeros at inﬁnity.

29.4 Root Locus Rules
Here is the complete set of rules for drawing the root-locus graph. We will use p and z
to denote the number of poles and the number of zeros of the open-loop transfer function,
respectively. We will use Pi and Zi to denote the location of the ith pole and the ith zero,
respectively. Likewise, we will use ψ i and ρi to denote the angle from a given point to the
ith pole and zero, respectively. All angles are given in radians (π denotes π radians).
There are 11 rules that, if followed correctly, will allow you to create a correct root-locus
graph.
Rule 1
There is one branch of the root-locus for every root of b(s).

236

Root Locus Rules

Rule 2
The roots of b(s) are the poles of the open-loop transfer function. Mark the roots of
b(s) on the graph with an X.
Rule 3
The roots of a(s) are the zeros of the open-loop transfer function. Mark the roots of
a(s) on the graph with an O. There should be a number of O's less than or equal to
the number of X's. There is a number of zeros p - z located at inﬁnity. These zeros at
inﬁnity are called ”implicit zeros”. All branches of the root-locus will move from a pole
to a zero (some branches, therefore, may travel towards inﬁnity).
Rule 4
A point on the real axis is a part of the root-locus if it is to the left of an odd number
of poles and zeros.
Rule 5
The gain at any point on the root locus can be determined by the inverse of the absolute
value of the magnitude equation.
b(s)
= |K|
a(s)
Rule 6
The root-locus diagram is symmetric about the real-axis. All complex roots are conjugates.
Rule 7
Two roots that meet on the real-axis will break away from the axis at certain break-away
points. If we set s → σ (no imaginary part), we can use the following equation:
K =−

b(σ)
a(σ)

And diﬀerentiate to ﬁnd the local maximum:
dK
d b(σ)
=
dσ
dσ a(σ)
Rule 8
The breakaway lines of the root locus are separated by angles of απ , where α is the
number of poles intersecting at the breakaway point.
Rule 9
The breakaway root-loci follow asymptotes that intersect the real axis at angles φω
given by:

237

Root Locus

ϕω =

π + 2N π
,
p−z

N = 0, 1, ...p − z − 1

The origin of these asymptotes, OA, is given as the sum of the pole locations, minus
the sum of the zero locations, divided by the diﬀerence between the number of poles
and zeros:
∑

p Pi −

OA =

∑

z Zi

p−z

The OA point should lie on the real axis.
Rule 10
The branches of the root locus cross the imaginary axis at points where the angle
equation value is π (i.e., 180o ).
Rule 11
The angles that the root locus branch makes with a complex-conjugate pole or zero is
determined by analyzing the angle equation at a point inﬁnitessimally close to the
pole or zero. The angle of departure, φd is given by the following equation:
∑

ψi +

p

∑

ρi + ϕd = π

z

The angle of arrival, φa , is given by:
∑

ρi +

z

∑

ψ i + ϕa = π

p

We will explain these rules in the rest of the chapter.

29.5 Root Locus Equations
Here are the two major equations:
[Root Locus Equations]
S-Domain Equations
1 + KG(s)H(s) = 0
∠KG(s)H(s) = 180o

Z-Domain Equations
1 + KGH(z) = 0
∠KGH(z) = 180o

Note that the sum of the angles of all the poles and zeros must equal to 180.

238

Root Locus Equations

29.5.1 Number of Asymptotes
If the number of explicit zeros of the system is denoted by Z (uppercase z), and the number
of poles of the system is given by P, then the number of asymptotes (Na ) is given by:
[Number of Asymptotes]
Na = P − Z
The angles of the asymptotes are given by:
[Angle of Asymptotes]
ϕk = (2k + 1)

π
P −Z

for values of k = [0, 1, ...Na − 1].

The angles for the asymptotes are measured from the positive real-axis

29.5.2 Asymptote Intersection Point
The asymptotes intersect the real axis at the point:
[Origin of Asymptotes]
∑

σ0 =
∑

P−

∑
Z

P −Z

Where P is the sum of all the locations of the poles, and
of the explicit zeros.

∑

Z is the sum of all the locations

29.5.3 Breakaway Points
The breakaway points are located at the roots of the following equation:
[Breakaway Point Locations]
dG(s)H(s)
= 0 or dGH(z)
=0
ds
dz

Once you solve for z, the real roots give you the breakaway/reentry points. Complex roots
correspond to a lack of breakaway/reentry.
The breakaway point equation can be diﬃcult to solve, so many times the actual location
is approximated.

239

Root Locus

29.6 Root Locus and Stability
The root locus procedure should produce a graph of where the poles of the system are for
all values of gain K. When any or all of the roots of D are in the unstable region, the
system is unstable. When any of the roots are in the marginally stable region, the system
is marginally stable (oscillatory). When all of the roots of D are in the stable region, then
the system is stable.
It is important to note that a system that is stable for gain K1 may become unstable for
a diﬀerent gain K2 . Some systems may have poles that cross over from stable to unstable
multiple times, giving multiple gain values for which the system is unstable.
Here is a quick refresher:
Region
Stable Region
Marginally Stable Region
Unstable Region

S-Domain
Left-Hand S
Plane
The vertical axis
Right-Hand S
Plane

σ<0

Z-Domain
Inside the Unit Circle

|z| < 1

σ=0

The Unit Circle

|z| = 1

σ>0

Outside the Unit Circle,

|z| > 1

29.7 Examples
29.7.1 Example 1: First-Order System
Find the root-locus of the open-loop system:
1
T (s) = 1+2s

If we look at the characteristic equation, we can quickly solve for the single pole of the
system:
D(s) = 1 + 2s = 0
s = − 12
We plot that point on our root-locus graph, and everything on the real axis to the left of
that single point is on the root locus (from the rules, above). Therefore, the root locus of
our system looks like this:

240

Examples

Figure 112

From this image, we can see that for all values of gain this system is stable.

29.7.2 Example 2: Third Order System
We are given a system with three real poles, shown by the transfer function:
1
T (s) = (s+1)(s+2)(s+3)

Is this system stable?
To answer this question, we can plot the root-locus. First, we draw the poles on the graph
at locations -1, -2, and -3. The real-axis between the ﬁrst and second poles is on the
root-locus, as well as the real axis to the left of the third pole. We know also that there
is going to be breakaway from the real axis at some point. The origin of asymptotes is
located at:
OA = −1+−2+−3
= −2,
3
and the angle of the asymptotes is given by:
ϕ = 180(2k+1)
fork = 0, 1, 2
3
We know that the breakaway occurs between the ﬁrst and second poles, so we will estimate
the exact breakaway point. Drawing the root-locus gives us the graph below.

241

Root Locus

Figure 113

We can see that for low values of gain the system is stable, but for higher values of gain,
the system becomes unstable.

29.7.3 Example: Complex-Conjugate Zeros
Find the root-locus graph for the following system transfer function:
2

+4.5s+5.625
T (s) = K s s(s+1)(s+2)

242

Examples
If we look at the denominator, we have poles at the origin, -1, and -2. Following Rule 4,
we know that the real-axis between the ﬁrst two poles, and the real axis after the third
pole are all on the root-locus. We also know that there is going to be a breakaway point
between the ﬁrst two poles, so that they can approach the complex conjugate zeros. If we
use the quadratic equation on the numerator, we can ﬁnd that the zeros are located at:
s = (−2.25 + j0.75), (−2.25 − j0.75)
If we draw our graph, we get the following:

Figure 114

We can see from this graph that the system is stable for all values of K.

29.7.4 Example: Root-Locus Using MATLAB/Octave
Use MATLAB, Octave, or another piece of mathematical simulation software to produce
the root-locus graph for the following system:
2

s +7s+12
T (s) = K (s
2 +3s+6)

First, we must multiply through in the denominator:

243

Root Locus
N (s) = S 2 + 7S + 12
D(s) = S 2 + 3S + 2
Now, we can generate the coeﬃcient vectors from the numerator and denominator:
num = [0 1 7 12];
den = [0 1 3 2];

Next, we can feed these vectors into the rlocus command:
rlocus(num, den);

Note:In Octave, we need to create a system structure ﬁrst, by typing:
sys = tf(num, den);
rlocus(sys);

Either way, we generate the following graph:

Figure 115

244

30 Nyquist Criterion
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Nyquist Stability Criteria

30.1 Nyquist Stability Criteria
The Nyquist Stability Criteria is a test for system stability, just like the RouthHurwitz1 test, or the Root-Locus2 Methodology. However, the Nyquist Criteria can also
give us additional information about a system. Routh-Hurwitz and Root-Locus can tell
us where the poles of the system are for particular values of gain. By altering the gain
of the system, we can determine if any of the poles move into the RHP, and therefore
become unstable. The Nyquist Criteria, however, can tell us things about the frequency
characteristics of the system. For instance, some systems with constant gain might be
stable for low-frequency inputs, but become unstable for high-frequency inputs.
Here is an example of a system responding diﬀerently to diﬀerent frequency input
values: Consider an ordinary glass of water. If the water is exposed to ordinary sunlight,
it is unlikely to heat up too much. However, if the water is exposed to microwave
radiation (from inside your microwave oven, for instance), the water will quickly heat
up to a boil.
Also, the Nyquist Criteria can tell us things about the phase of the input signals, the
time-shift of the system, and other important information.

30.2 Contours
A contour is a complicated mathematical construct, but luckily we only need to worry
ourselves with a few points about them. We will denote contours with the Greek letter Γ
(gamma). Contours are lines, drawn on a graph, that follow certain rules:
1. The contour must close (it must form a complete loop)
2. The contour may not cross directly through a pole of the system.
3. Contours must have a direction (clockwise or counterclockwise, generally).
4. A contour is called ”simple” if it has no self-intersections. We only consider simple
contours here.
Once we have such a contour, we can develop some important theorems about them,
and ﬁnally use these theorems to derive the Nyquist stability criterion.
1
2

Chapter 27 on page 221
Chapter 29 on page 233

245

Nyquist Criterion

30.3 Argument Principle
w:Argument principle3
Here is the argument principle, which we will use to derive the stability criterion. Do
not worry if you do not understand all the terminology, we will walk through it:
The Argument Principle
If we have a contour, Γ, drawn in one plane (say the complex laplace plane,
for instance), we can map that contour into another plane, the F(s) plane, by
transforming the contour with the function F(s). The resultant contour, ΓF (s)
will circle the origin point of the F(s) plane N times, where N is equal to the
diﬀerence between Z and P (the number of zeros and poles of the function F(s),
respectively).
When we have our contour, Γ, we transform it into ΓF (s) by plugging every point of
the contour into the function F(s), and taking the resultant value to be a point on
the transformed contour.

30.3.1 Example: First Order System
Let's say, for instance, that Γ is a unit square contour in the complex s plane. The
vertices of the square are located at points I,J,K,L, as follows:
I = 1+j
J = 1−j
K = −1 − j
L = −1 + j
we must also specify the direction of our contour, and we will say (arbitrarily)
that it is a clockwise contour (travels from I to J to K to L). We will also deﬁne
our transform function, F(s), to be the following:
F (s) = 2s + 1
We can factor the denominator of F(s), and we can show that there is one zero at
s → -0.5, and no poles. Plotting this root on the same graph as our contour, we
see clearly that it lies within the contour. Since s is a complex variable, deﬁned
with real and imaginary parts as:
s = σ + jω
We know that F(s) must also be complex. We will say, for reasons of simplicity,
that the axes in the F(s) plane are u and v, and are related as such:
F (s) = u + vj = 2(σ + jω) + 1
From this relationship, we can deﬁne u and v in terms of σ and ω:
u = 2σ + 1
v = 2ω
Now, to transform Γ, we will plug every point of the contour into F(s), and the
resultant values will be the points of ΓF (s) . We will solve for complex values u
and v, and we will start with the vertices, because they are the simplest examples:
u + vj = F (I) = 3 + 2j

3

246

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument%20principle

The Nyquist Contour

u + vj = F (J) = 3 − 2j
u + vj = F (K) = −1 + 2j
u + vj = F (L) = −1 − 2j
We can take the lines in between the vertices as a function of s, and plug the
entire function into the transform. Luckily, because we are using straight lines,
we can simplify very much:
• Line from I to J: σ = 1, u = 3, v = ω
• Line from J to K: ω = −1, u = 2σ + 1, v = −1
• Line from K to L: σ = −1, u = −1, v = ω
• Line from L to I: ω = 1, u = 2σ + 1, v = 1
And when we graph these functions, from vertex to vertex, we see that the
resultant contour in the F(s) plane is a square, but not centered at the origin,
and larger in size. Notice how the contour encircles the origin of the F(s) plane
one time. This will be important later on.

30.3.2 Example: Second-Order System
Let's say that we have a slightly more complicated mapping function:
F (s) = 2s2s+0.5
+2s+1
We can see clearly that F(s) has a zero at s → -0.5, and a complex conjugate set
of poles at s → -0.5 + 0.5j and s → -0.5 - 0.5j. We will use the same unit square
contour, Γ, from above:
I = 1+j
J = 1−j
K = −1 − j
L = −1 + j
We can see clearly that the poles and the zero of F(s) lie within Γ. Setting F(s)
to u + vj and solving, we get the following relationships:
u + vj = F (σ + jω) = (2σ2 −2ω(σ+0.5)+j(ω)
2 +2σ+1)+j(2σω+ω)
This is a little diﬃcult now, because we need to simplify this whole expression,
and separate it out into real and imaginary parts. There are two methods to doing
this, neither of which is short or easy enough to demonstrate here to entirety:
a) We convert the numerator and denominator polynomials into a polar representation in terms of r and θ, then perform the division, and then convert
back into rectangular format.
b) We plug each segment of our contour into this equation, and simplify numerically.

30.4 The Nyquist Contour
The Nyquist contour, the contour that makes the entire nyquist criterion work, must
encircle the entire unstable region of the complex plane. For analog systems, this is
the right half of the complex s plane. For digital systems, this is the entire plane
outside the unit circle. Remember that if a pole to the closed-loop transfer function
(or equivalently a zero of the characteristic equation) lies in the unstable region of the
complex plane, the system is an unstable system.

247

Nyquist Criterion
Analog Systems
The Nyquist contour for analog systems is an inﬁnite semi-circle that encircles the entire
right-half of the s plane. The semicircle travels up the imaginary axis from negative inﬁnity
to positive inﬁnity. From positive inﬁnity, the contour breaks away from the imaginary
axis, in the clock-wise direction, and forms a giant semicircle.
Digital Systems
The Nyquist contour in digital systems is a counter-clockwise encirclement of the unit
circle.

30.5 Nyquist Criteria
w:Nyquist stability criterion4
Let us ﬁrst introduce the most important equation when dealing with the Nyquist criterion:
N = Z −P
Where:
• N is the number of encirclements of the (-1, 0) point.
• Z is the number of zeros of the characteristic equation.
• P is the number of poles in the of the open-loop characteristic equation.
With this equation stated, we can now state the Nyquist Stability Criterion:
Nyquist Stability Criterion
A feedback control system is stable, if and only if the contour ΓF (s) in the F(s) plane
does not encircle the (-1, 0) point when P is 0.
A feedback control system is stable, if and only if the contour ΓF (s) in the F(s) plane
encircles the (-1, 0) point a number of times equal to the number of poles of F(s)
enclosed by Γ.
w:Nyquist plot5
In other words, if P is zero then N must equal zero. Otherwise, N must equal P. Essentially,
we are saying that Z must always equal zero, because Z is the number of zeros of the
characteristic equation (and therefore the number of poles of the closed-loop transfer
function) that are in the right-half of the s plane.
Keep in mind that we don't necessarily know the locations of all the zeros of the characteristic equation. So if we ﬁnd, using the nyquist criterion, that the number of poles is
not equal to N, then we know that there must be a zero in the right-half plane, and that
therefore the system is unstable.

4
5

248

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nyquist%20stability%20criterion
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nyquist%20plot

Nyquist ↔ Bode

30.6 Nyquist ↔ Bode
A careful inspection of the Nyquist plot will reveal a surprising relationship to the Bode
plots of the system. If we use the Bode phase plot as the angle θ, and the Bode magnitude
plot as the distance r, then it becomes apparent that the Nyquist plot of a system is simply
the polar representation of the Bode plots.
To obtain the Nyquist plot from the Bode plots, we take the phase angle and the magnitude value at each frequency ω. We convert the magnitude value from decibels back into
gain ratios. Then, we plot the ordered pairs (r, θ) on a polar graph.

30.7 Nyquist in the Z Domain
The Nyquist Criteria can be utilized in the digital domain in a similar manner as it is
used with analog systems. The primary diﬀerence in using the criteria is that the shape
of the Nyquist contour must change to encompass the unstable region of the Z plane.
Therefore, instead of an inﬁnitesimal semi-circle, the Nyquist contour for digital systems
is a counter-clockwise unit circle. By changing the shape of the contour, the same N = Z
- P equation holds true, and the resulting Nyquist graph will typically look identical to
one from an analog system, and can be interpreted in the same way.

249

31 State-Space Stability
dhunparserurl Control Systems/State-Space Stability

31.1 State-Space Stability
If a system is represented in the state-space domain, it doesn't make sense to convert that
system to a transfer function representation (or even a transfer matrix representation) in
an attempt to use any of the previous stability methods. Luckily, there are other analysis
methods that can be used with the state-space representation to determine if a system is
stable or not. First, let us ﬁrst introduce the notion of unstability:
Unstable
A system is said to be unstable if the system response approaches inﬁnity as time
approaches inﬁnity. If our system is G(t), then, we can say a system is unstable if:
lim (t)∥ = ∞

t→∞

Also, a key concept when we are talking about stability of systems is the concept of an
equilibrium point:
Equilibrium Point
Given a system f such that:
x′ (t) = f (x(t))
A particular state xe is called an equilibrium point if
f (xe ) = 0 for all time t in the interval [t0 , ∞), where t0 is the starting time of the
system.
An equilibrium point is also known as a ”stationary point”, a ”critical point”, a ”singular
point”, or a ”rest state” in other books or literature.
The deﬁnitions below typically require that the equilibrium point be zero. If we have an
equilibrium point xe = a, then we can use the following change of variables to make the
equilibrium point zero:
x̄ = xe − a = 0
We will also see below that a system's stability is deﬁned in terms of an equilibrium point.
Related to the concept of an equilibrium point is the notion of a zero point:
Zero State

251

State-Space Stability

A state xz is a zero state if xz = 0. A zero state may or may not be an equilibrium
point.

31.1.1 Stability Deﬁnitions
The equilibrium x = 0 of the system is stable if and only if the solutions of the zero-input
state equation are bounded. Equivalently, x = 0 is a stable equilibrium if and only if for
every initial time t0 , there exists an associated ﬁnite constant k(t0 ) such that:
supt≥t0 ∥ϕ(t, t0 )∥ = k(t0 ) < ∞
Where sup is the supremum, or ”maximum” value of the equation. The maximum value
of this equation must never exceed the arbitrary ﬁnite constant k (and therefore it may
not be inﬁnite at any point).
Uniform Stability
The system is deﬁned to be uniformly stable if it is stable for all initial values of t0 :
supt≥0 [supt≥t0 ∥ϕ(t, t0 )∥] = k0 < ∞
Uniform stability is a more general, and more powerful form of stability than was previously
provided.
Asymptotic Stability
A system is deﬁned to be asymptotically stable if:
lim ∥ϕ(t, t0 )∥ = 0

t→∞

A time-invariant system is asymptotically stable if all the eigenvalues of the system matrix
A have negative real parts. If a system is asymptotically stable, it is also BIBO stable.
However the inverse is not true: A system that is BIBO stable might not be asymptotically
stable.
Uniform Asymptotic Stability
A system is deﬁned to be uniformly asymptotically stable if the system is asymptotically stable for all values of t0 .
Exponential Stability
A system is deﬁned to be exponentially stable if the system response decays exponentially towards zero as time approaches inﬁnity.

252

Eigenvalues and Poles
For linear systems, uniform asymptotic stability is the same as exponential stability.
This is not the case with non-linear systems.

31.1.2 Marginal Stability
Here we will discuss some rules concerning systems that are marginally stable. Because we
are discussing eigenvalues and eigenvectors, these theorems only apply to time-invariant
systems.
1. A time-invariant system is marginally stable if and only if all the eigenvalues of the
system matrix A are zero or have negative real parts, and those with zero real parts
are simple roots of the minimal polynomial of A.
2. The equilibrium x = 0 of the state equation is uniformly stable if all eigenvalues of
A have non-positive real parts, and there is a complete set of distinct eigenvectors
associated with the eigenvalues with zero real parts.
3. The equilibrium x = 0 of the state equation is exponentially stable if and only if all
eigenvalues of the system matrix A have negative real parts.

31.2 Eigenvalues and Poles
A Linearly Time Invariant (LTI) system is stable (asymptotically stable, see above) if
all the eigenvalues of A have negative real parts. Consider the following state equation:
x′ = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
We can take the Laplace Transform of both sides of this equation, using initial conditions
of x0 = 0:
sX(s) = AX(s) + BU (s)
Subtract AX(s) from both sides:
sX(s) − AX(s) = BU (s)
(sI − A)X(s) = BU (s)
Assuming (sI - A) is nonsingular, we can multiply both sides by the inverse:
X(s) = (sI − A)−1 BU (s)
Now, if we remember our formula for ﬁnding the matrix inverse from the adjoint matrix:
A−1 = adj(A)
|A|
We can use that deﬁnition here:
(s)
X(s) = adj(sI−A)BU
|(sI−A)|

Let's look at the denominator (which we will now call D(s)) more closely. To be stable,
the following condition must be true:
D(s) = |(sI − A)| = 0

253

State-Space Stability
And if we substitute λ for s, we see that this is actually the characteristic equation of
matrix A! This means that the values for s that satisfy the equation (the poles of our
transfer function) are precisely the eigenvalues of matrix A. In the S domain, it is required
that all the poles of the system be located in the left-half plane, and therefore all the
eigenvalues of A must have negative real parts.

31.3 Impulse Response Matrix
We can deﬁne the Impulse response matrix, G(t, τ ) in order to deﬁne further tests for
stability:
[Impulse Response Matrix]

{

C(t)ϕ(t, τ )B(τ )
0

G(t, τ ) =

if t ≥ τ
if t < τ

The system is uniformly stable if and only if there exists a ﬁnite positive constant L such
that for all time t and all initial conditions t0 with t ≥ t0 the following integral is satisﬁed:
∫t

0 (t, τ )τ ≤ L

In other words, the above integral must have a ﬁnite value, or the system is not uniformly
stable.
In the time-invariant case, the impulse response matrix reduces to:
{

G(t) =

CeAt B
0

if t ≥ 0
if t < 0

In a time-invariant system, we can use the impulse response matrix to determine if the
system is uniformly BIBO stable by taking a similar integral:
∫∞
0

(t) ≤ L

Where L is a ﬁnite constant.

31.4 Positive Deﬁniteness
These terms are important, and will be used in further discussions on this topic.
• f(x) is positive deﬁnite if f(x) > 0 for all x.
• f(x) is positive semi-deﬁnite if f (x) ≥ 0 for all x, and f(x) = 0 only if x = 0.
• f(x) is negative deﬁnite if f(x) < 0 for all x.
• f(x) is negative semi-deﬁnite if f (x) ≤ 0 for all x, and f(x) = 0 only if x = 0.
A Hermitian matrix X is positive deﬁnite if all its principle minors are positive. Also,
a matrix X is positive deﬁnite if all its eigenvalues have positive real parts. These two
methods may be used interchangeably.
Positive deﬁniteness is a very important concept. So much so that the Lyapunov stability
test depends on it. The other categorizations are not as important, but are included here
for completeness.

254

Lyapunov Stability

31.5 Lyapunov Stability
31.5.1 Lyapunov's Equation
For linear systems, we can use the Lyapunov Equation, below, to determine if a system
is stable. We will state the Lyapunov Equation ﬁrst, and then state the Lyapunov
Stability Theorem.
[Lyapunov Equation]
M A + AT M = −N
Where A is the system matrix, and M and N are p × p square matrices.
Lyapunov Stability Theorem
An LTI system x′ = Ax is stable if there exists a matrix M that satisﬁes the Lyapunov
Equation where N is an arbitrary positive deﬁnite matrix, and M is a unique positive
deﬁnite matrix.
Notice that for the Lyapunov Equation to be satisﬁed, the matrices must be compatible
sizes. In fact, matrices A, M, and N must all be square matrices of equal size. Alternatively,
we can write:
Lyapunov Stability Theorem (alternate)
If all the eigenvalues of the system matrix A have negative real parts, then the Lyapunov Equation has a unique solution M for every positive deﬁnite matrix N, and the
solution can be calculated by:
∫ ∞

M=

T

eA t N eAt dt

0

If the matrix M can be calculated in this manner, the system is asymptotically stable.

255

32 Controllability and Observability
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Controllability and Observability

32.1 System Interaction
In the world of control engineering, there are a slew of systems available that need to
be controlled. The task of a control engineer is to design controller and compensator
units to interact with these pre-existing systems. However, some systems simply cannot
be controlled (or, more often, cannot be controlled in speciﬁc ways). The concept of
controllability refers to the ability of a controller to arbitrarily alter the functionality of
the system plant.
The state-variable of a system, x, represents the internal workings of the system that can
be separate from the regular input-output relationship of the system. This also needs to
be measured, or observed. The term observability describes whether the internal state
variables of the system can be externally measured.

32.2 Controllability
Complete state controllability (or simply controllability if no other context is given) describes the ability of an external input to move the internal state of a system from any
initial state to any other ﬁnal state in a ﬁnite time interval
We will start oﬀ with the deﬁnitions of the term controllability, and the related terms
reachability and stabilizability.
Controllability
A system with internal state vector x is called controllable if and only if the system
states can be changed by changing the system input.
Reachability
A particular state x1 is called reachable if there exists an input that transfers the state
of the system from the initial state x0 to x1 in some ﬁnite time interval [t0 , t).
Stabilizability
A system is Stabilizable if all states that cannot be reached decay to zero asymptotically.
We can also write out the deﬁnition of reachability more precisely:

257

Controllability and Observability

A state x1 is called reachable at time t1 if for some ﬁnite initial time t0 there exists
an input u(t) that transfers the state x(t) from the origin at t0 to x1 .
A system is reachable at time t1 if every state x1 in the state-space is reachable at
time t1 .
Similarly, we can more precisely deﬁne the concept of controllability:
A state x0 is controllable at time t0 if for some ﬁnite time t1 there exists an input
u(t) that transfers the state x(t) from x0 to the origin at time t1 .
A system is called controllable at time t0 if every state x0 in the state-space is controllable.

32.2.1 Controllability Matrix
For LTI (linear time-invariant) systems, a system is reachable if and only if its controllability matrix, ζ, has a full row rank of p, where p is the dimension of the matrix A, and
p × q is the dimension of matrix B.
[

]

[Controllability Matrix]

ζ = B AB A2 B · · · Ap−1 B ∈ Rp×pq
A system is controllable or ”Controllable to the origin” when any state x1 can be driven to
the zero state x = 0 in a ﬁnite number of steps.
A system is controllable when the rank of the system matrix A is p, and the rank of the
controllability matrix is equal to:
Rank(ζ) = Rank(A−1 ζ) = p
If the second equation is not satisﬁed, the system is not .
MATLAB allows one to easily create the controllability matrix with the ctrb command.
To create the controllability matrix ζ simply type
ζ = ctrb(A, B)
where A and B are mentioned above. Then in order to determine if the system is controllable or not one can use the rank command to determine if it has full rank.
If
Rank(A) < p
Then controllability does not imply reachability.
• Reachability always implies controllability.
• Controllability only implies reachability when the state transition matrix is nonsingular.

258

Controllability

32.2.2 Determining Reachability
There are four methods that can be used to determine if a system is reachable or not:
1. If the p rows of ϕ(t, τ )B(t) are linearly independent over the ﬁeld of complex numbers.
That is, if the rank of the product of those two matrices is equal to p for all values of
t and τ
2. If the rank of the controllability matrix is the same as the rank of the system matrix
A.
3. If the rank of rank[λI − A, B] = p for all eigenvalues λ of the matrix A.
4. If the rank of the reachability gramian (described below) is equal to the rank of
the system matrix A.
Each one of these conditions is both necessary and suﬃcient. If any one test fails, all
the tests will fail, and the system is not reachable. If any test is positive, then all the
tests will be positive, and the system is reachable.

32.2.3 Gramians
Gramians are complicated mathematical functions that can be used to determine
speciﬁc things about a system. For instance, we can use gramians to determine
whether a system is controllable or reachable. Gramians, because they are more complicated than other methods, are typically only used when other methods of analyzing
a system fail (or are too diﬃcult).
All the gramians presented on this page are all matrices with dimension p × p (the
same size as the system matrix A).
All the gramians presented here will be described using the general case of Linear timevariant systems. To change these into LTI (time-invariant equations), the following
substitutions can be used:
ϕ(t, τ ) → eA(t−τ )
′

ϕ′ (t, τ ) → eA (t−τ )
Where we are using the notation X' to denote the transpose of a matrix X (as opposed to
the traditional notation XT ).

32.2.4 Reachability Gramian
We can deﬁne the reachability gramian as the following integral:
[Reachability Gramian]
∫ t1

Wr (t0 , t1 ) = t0 ϕ(t1 , τ )B(τ )B ′ (τ )ϕ′ (t1 , τ )dτ
The system is reachable if the rank of the reachability gramian is the same as the rank of
the system matrix:
rank(Wr ) = p <chemistry>/control{range}

259

Controllability and Observability

32.2.5 Controllability Gramian
We can deﬁne the controllability gramian of a system (A, B) as:
[Controllability Gramian]
∫ t1

Wc (t0 , t1 ) = t0 ϕ(t0 , τ )B(τ )B ′ (τ )ϕ′ (t0 , τ )dτ
The system is controllable if the rank of the controllability gramian is the same as the rank
of the system matrix:
rank(Wc ) = p
If the system is time-invariant, there are two important points to be made. First, the
reachability gramian and the controllability gramian reduce to be the same equation.
Therefore, for LTI systems, if we have found one gramian, then we automatically know
both gramians. Second, the controllability gramian can also be found as the solution to
the following Lyapunov equation:
AWc + Wc A′ = −BB ′
Many software packages, notably MATLAB, have functions to solve the Lyapunov equation. By using this last relation, we can also solve for the controllability gramian using
these existing functions.

32.3 Observability
The state-variables of a system might not be able to be measured for any of the following
reasons:
1. The location of the particular state variable might not be physically accessible (a
capacitor or a spring, for instance).
2. There are no appropriate instruments to measure the state variable, or the statevariable might be measured in units for which there does not exist any measurement
device.
3. The state-variable is a derived ”dummy” variable that has no physical meaning.
If things cannot be directly observed, for any of the reasons above, it can be necessary
to calculate or estimate the values of the internal state variables, using only the
input/output relation of the system, and the output history of the system from the
starting time. In other words, we must ask whether or not it is possible to determine
what the inside of the system (the internal system states) is like, by only observing the
outside performance of the system (input and output)? We can provide the following
formal deﬁnition of mathematical observability:
Observability
A system with an initial state, x(t0 ) is observable if and only if the value of
the initial state can be determined from the system output y(t) that has been
observed through the time interval t0 < t < tf . If the initial state cannot be so
determined, the system is unobservable.
Complete Observability

260

Observability

A system is said to be completely observable if all the possible initial states
of the system can be observed. Systems that fail this criteria are said to be
unobservable.
Detectability
A system is Detectable if all states that cannot be observed decay to zero asymptotically.
Constructability
A system is constructable if the present state of the system can be determined
from the present and past outputs and inputs to the system. If a system is
observable, then it is also constructable. The relationship does not work the
other way around.
A system state xi is unobservable at a given time ti if the zero-input response of
the system is zero for all time t. If a system is observable, then the only state that
produces a zero output for all time is the zero state. We can use this concept to deﬁne
the term state-observability.
State-Observability
A system is completely state-observable at time t0 or the pair (A, C) is observable at t0 if the only state that is unobservable at t0 is the zero state x =
0.

32.3.1 Constructability
A state x is unconstructable at a time t1 if for every ﬁnite time t < t1 the zero input
response of the system is zero for all time t.
A system is completely state constructable at time t1 if the only state x that is
unconstructable at t0 is x = 0.
If a system is observable at an initial time t0 , then it is constructable at some time t
> t0 , if it is constructable at t1 .

32.3.2 Observability Matrix
The observability of the system is dependent only on the system states and the system
output, so we can simplify our state equations to remove the input terms:
Matrix Dimensions:
A: p × p
B: p × q
C: r × p
D: r × q

x′ (t) = Ax(t)
y(t) = Cx(t)

261

Controllability and Observability
Therefore, we can show that the observability of the system is dependent only on the
coeﬃcient matrices A and C. We can show precisely how to determine whether a system
is observable, using only these two matrices. If we have the observability matrix Q:
[Observability Matrix]


C



 CA 



2 
CA


Q=

 .. 
 . 

CAp−1
we can show that the system is observable if and only if the Q matrix has a rank of p.
Notice that the Q matrix has the dimensions pr × p.
MATLAB allows one to easily create the observability matrix with the obsv command.
To create the observability matrix Q simply type
Q=obsv(A,C)
where A and C are mentioned above. Then in order to determine if the system is observable
or not one can use the rank command to determine if it has full rank.

32.3.3 Observability Gramian
We can deﬁne an observability gramian as:
[Observability Gramian]
∫
Wo (t0 , t1 ) = tt01 ϕ′ (τ, t0 )C ′ (τ )C(τ )ϕ(τ, t0 )dτ

A system is completely state observable at time t0 < t < t1 if and only if the rank of the
observability gramian is equal to the size p of the system matrix A.
If the system (A, B, C, D) is time-invariant, we can construct the observability gramian
as the solution to the Lyapunov equation:
A′ Wo + Wo A = −C ′ C

32.3.4 Constructability Gramian
We can deﬁne a constructability gramian as:
[Constructability Gramian]
∫
Wcn (t0 , t1 ) = tt01 ϕ′ (τ, t1 )C ′ (τ )C(τ )ϕ(τ, t1 )dτ

A system is completely state observable at an initial time t0 if and only if there exists a
ﬁnite t1 such that:
rank(W0 ) = rank(Wcn ) = p

262

Duality Principle
Notice that the constructability and observability gramians are very similar, and typically
they can both be calculated at the same time, only substituting in diﬀerent values into the
state-transition matrix.

32.4 Duality Principle
The concepts of controllability and observability are very similar. In fact, there is a
concrete relationship between the two. We can say that a system (A, B) is controllable if
and only if the system (A', C, B', D) is observable. This fact can be proven by plugging
A' in for A, and B' in for C into the observability Gramian. The resulting equation will
exactly mirror the formula for the controllability gramian, implying that the two results
are the same.

263

33 System Speciﬁcations
dhunparserurl Control Systems/System Speciﬁcations

33.1 System Speciﬁcation
There are a number of diﬀerent speciﬁcations that might need to be met by a new system
design. In this chapter we will talk about some of the speciﬁcations that systems use, and
some of the ways that engineers analyze and quantify systems.

33.2 Steady-State Accuracy
33.3 Sensitivity
The sensitivity of a system is a parameter that is speciﬁed in terms of a given output and
a given input. The sensitivity measures how much change is caused in the output by small
changes to the reference input. Sensitive systems have very large changes in output in
response to small changes in the input. The sensitivity of system H to input X is denoted
as:
X (s)
SH

33.4 Disturbance Rejection
All physically-realized systems have to deal with a certain amount of noise and disturbance.
The ability of a system to reject the noise is known as the disturbance rejection of the
system.

33.5 Control Eﬀort
The control eﬀort is the amount of energy or power necessary for the controller to perform
its duty.

265

34 Controllers and Compensators
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Controllers and Compensators

34.1 Controllers
There are a number of diﬀerent standard types of control systems that have been studied
extensively. These controllers, speciﬁcally the P, PD, PI, and PID controllers are very
common in the production of physical systems, but as we will see they each carry several
drawbacks.

34.2 Proportional Controllers

Figure 116

A Proportional controller block diagram

Proportional controllers are simply gain values. These are essentially multiplicative coeﬃcients, usually denoted with a K. A P controller can only force the system poles to a spot
on the system's root locus. A P controller cannot be used for arbitrary pole placement.
We refer to this kind of controller by a number of diﬀerent names: proportional controller,
gain, and zeroth-order controller.

267

Controllers and Compensators

34.3 Derivative Controllers

Figure 117

A Proportional-Derivative controller block diagram

In the Laplace domain, we can show the derivative of a signal using the following notation:
D(s) = L {f ′ (t)} = sF (s) − f (0)
Since most systems that we are considering have zero initial condition, this simpliﬁes to:
D(s) = L {f ′ (t)} = sF (s)
The derivative controllers are implemented to account for future values, by taking the
derivative, and controlling based on where the signal is going to be in the future. Derivative controllers should be used with care, because even small amount of high-frequency
noise can cause very large derivatives, which appear like ampliﬁed noise. Also, derivative
controllers are diﬃcult to implement perfectly in hardware or software, so frequently solutions involving only integral controllers or proportional controllers are preferred over using
derivative controllers.
Notice that derivative controllers are not proper systems, in that the order of the numerator
of the system is greater than the order of the denominator of the system. This quality
of being a non-proper system also makes certain mathematical analysis of these systems
diﬃcult.

34.3.1 Z-Domain Derivatives
We won't derive this equation here, but suﬃce it to say that the following equation in the
Z-domain performs the same function as the Laplace-domain derivative:
D(z) = z−1
Tz
Where T is the sampling time of the signal.

268

Integral Controllers

34.4 Integral Controllers

Figure 118

A Proportional-Integral Controller block diagram

To implemenent an Integral in a Laplace domain transfer function, we use the following:
L

{∫
t

}

1
0 f (t) dt = s F (s)

Integral controllers of this type add up the area under the curve for past time. In this
manner, a PI controller (and eventually a PID) can take account of the past performance
of the controller, and correct based on past errors.

34.4.1 Z-Domain Integral
The integral controller can be implemented in the Z domain using the following equation:
z+1
D(z) = z−1

269

Controllers and Compensators

34.5 PID Controllers

Figure 119

A block diagram of a PID controller

PID controllers are combinations of the proportional, derivative, and integral controllers.
Because of this, PID controllers have large amounts of ﬂexibility. We will see below that
there are deﬁnite limites on PID control.

34.5.1 PID Transfer Function
The transfer function for a standard PID controller is an addition of the Proportional, the
Integral, and the Diﬀerential controller transfer functions (hence the name, PID). Also,
we give each term a gain constant, to control the weight that each factor has on the ﬁnal
output:
[PID]
D(s) = Kp + Ksi + Kd s
Notice that we can write the transfer function of a PID controller in a slightly diﬀerent
way:

270

PID Controllers
A0 +A1 s
D(s) = B
0 +B1 s

This form of the equation will be especially useful to us when we look at polynomial design.

34.5.2 PID Signal ﬂow diagram

Figure 120

Signal ﬂow diagram for a PID controller

34.5.3 PID Tuning
The process of selecting the various coeﬃcient values to make a PID controller perform
correctly is called PID Tuning. There are a number of diﬀerent methods for determining
these values:1
1) Direct Synthesis (DS) method
2) Internal Model Control (IMC) method

1

Seborg, Dale E.; Edgar, Thomas F.; Mellichamp, Duncan A. (2003). Process Dynamics and Control,
Second Edition. John Wiley & Sons,Inc.
0471000779

271

Controllers and Compensators
3) Controller tuning relations
4) Frequency response techniques
5) Computer simulation
6) On-line tuning after the control system is installed
7)Trial and error
Notes:

34.5.4 Digital PID
In the Z domain, the PID controller has the following transfer function:

D(z) = Kp + Ki T2

[

z+1
z−1

]

[

+ Kd z−1
Tz

]

[Digital PID]

And we can convert this into a canonical equation by manipulating the above equation to
obtain:
−1

−2

+a2 z
0 +a1 z
D(z) = a1+b
−1 +b z −2
1z
2

Where:
a0 = Kp + K2i T + KTd
d
a1 = −Kp + K2i T + −2K
T

a2 = KTd
b1 = −1
b2 = 0
Once we have the Z-domain transfer function of the PID controller, we can convert it into
the digital time domain:
y[n] = x[n]a0 + x[n − 1]a1 + x[n − 2]a2 − y[n − 1]b1 − y[n − 2]b2
And ﬁnally, from this diﬀerence equation, we can create a digital ﬁlter structure to implement the PID.
For more information about digital ﬁlter structures, see Digital Signal Processing2

34.6 Bang-Bang Controllers
Despite the low-brow sounding name of the Bang-Bang controller, it is a very useful tool
that is only really available using digital methods. A better name perhaps for a bang-bang
controller is an on/oﬀ controller, where a digital system makes decisions based on target

272

Compensation
and threshold values, and decides whether to turn the controller on and oﬀ. Bang-bang
controllers are a non-linear style of control.
Consider the example of a household furnace. The oil in a furnace burns at a speciﬁc
temperature—it can't burn hotter or cooler. To control the temperature in your house
then, the thermostat control unit decides when to turn the furnace on, and when to turn
the furnace oﬀ. This on/oﬀ control scheme is a bang-bang controller.

34.7 Compensation
There are a number of diﬀerent compensation units that can be employed to help ﬁx
certain system metrics that are outside of a proper operating range. Most commonly, the
phase characteristics are in need of compensation, especially if the magnitude response is
to remain constant. There are four major types of compensation 1. Lead compensation 2.
Lag compensation 3. Lead-lag compensation 4. Lag-lead compensation

34.8 Phase Compensation
Occasionally, it is necessary to alter the phase characteristics of a given system, without
altering the magnitude characteristics. To do this, we need to alter the frequency response
in such a way that the phase response is altered, but the magnitude response is not altered.
To do this, we implement a special variety of controllers known as phase compensators.
They are called compensators because they help to improve the phase response of the
system.
There are two general types of compensators: Lead Compensators, and Lag
Compensators. If we combine the two types, we can get a special Lag-lead
Compensator system.(lead-lag system is not practically realisable).
When designing and implementing a phase compensator, it is important to analyze the
eﬀects on the gain and phase margins of the system, to ensure that compensation doesn't
cause the system to become unstable. phase lead compensation:- 1 it is same as addition
of zero to open loop TF since from pole zero point of view zero is nearer to origin than
pole hence eﬀect of zero dominant.

34.9 Phase Lead
The transfer function for a lead-compensator is as follows:
[Lead Compensator]
Tlead (s) = s−z
s−p
To make the compensator work correctly, the following property must be satisﬁed:
|z| < |p|

273

Controllers and Compensators
And both the pole and zero location should be close to the origin, in the LHP. Because
there is only one pole and one zero, they both should be located on the real axis.
Phase lead compensators help to shift the poles of the transfer function to the left, which
is beneﬁcial for stability purposes.

34.10 Phase Lag
The transfer function for a lag compensator is the same as the lead-compensator, and is
as follows:
[Lag Compensator]
Tlag (s) = s−z
s−p
However, in the lag compensator, the location of the pole and zero should be swapped:
|p| < |z|
Both the pole and the zero should be close to the origin, on the real axis.
The Phase lag compensator helps to improve the steady-state error of the system. The
poles of the lag compensator should be very close together to help prevent the poles of the
system from shifting right, and therefore reducing system stability.

34.11 Phase Lag-lead
w:Lag-lead compensator3
The transfer function of a Lag-lead compensator is simply a multiplication of the lead
and lag compensator transfer functions, and is given as:
[Lag-lead Compensator]
(s−z1 )(s−z2 )
TLag−lead (s) = (s−p
.
1 )(s−p2 )

Where typically the following relationship must hold true:
|p1 | > |z1 | > |z2 | > |p2 |

34.12 External links
• Standard Controller Forms on ControlTheoryPro.com4
• PID Control on ControlTheoryPro.com5
• PI Control on ControlTheoryPro.com6
3
4
5
6

274

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lag-lead%20compensator
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Standard_Controller_Forms
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=PID_Control
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=PI_Control

35 Nonlinear Systems
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Nonlinear Systems

35.1 Nonlinear General Solution
w:Non-linear control1 A nonlinear system, in general, can be deﬁned as follows:
x′ (t) = f (t, t0 , x, x0 )
x(t0 ) = x0
Where f is a nonlinear function of the time, the system state, and the initial conditions. If
the initial conditions are known, we can simplify this as:
x′ (t) = f (t, x)
The general solution of this equation (or the most general form of a solution that we can
state without knowing the form of f) is given by:
∫

x(t) = x0 + tt0 f (τ, x)dτ
and we can prove that this is the general solution to the above equation because when we
diﬀerentiate both sides we get the origin equation.

35.1.1 Iteration Method
The general solution to a nonlinear system can be found through a method of inﬁnite
iteration. We will deﬁne xn as being an iterative family of indexed variables. We can
deﬁne them recursively as such:
∫

xn (t) = x0 + tt0 f (τ, xn−1 (τ ))dτ
x1 (t) = x0
We can show that the following relationship is true:
x(t) = limn→∞ xn (t)
The xn series of equations will converge on the solution to the equation as n approaches
inﬁnity.

35.1.2 Types of Nonlinearities
Nonlinearities can be of two types:
1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-linear%20control

275

Nonlinear Systems
1. Intentional non-linearity: The non-linear elements that are added into a system.
Eg: Relay
2. Incidental non-linearity: The non-linear behavior that is already present in the
system. Eg: Saturation

35.2 Linearization
Nonlinear systems are diﬃcult to analyze, and for that reason one of the best methods
for analyzing those systems is to ﬁnd a linear approximation to the system. Frequently,
such approximations are only good for certain operating ranges, and are not valid
beyond certain bounds. The process of ﬁnding a suitable linear approximation to a
nonlinear system is known as linearization.

Figure 121
This image shows a linear approximation (dashed line) to a non-linear system response
(solid line). This linear approximation, like most, is accurate within a certain range,
but becomes more inaccurate outside that range. Notice how the curve and the linear
approximation diverge towards the right of the graph.

276

36 Common Nonlinearities
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Common Nonlinearities
There are some nonlinearities that happen so frequently in physical systems that they
are called ”Common nonlinearities”. These common nonlinearities include Hysteresis,
Backlash, and Dead-zone.

36.1 Hysteresis
Continuing with the example of a household thermostat, let's say that your thermostat
is set at 70 degrees (Fahrenheit). The furnace turns on, and the house heats up to
70 degrees, and then the thermostat dutifully turns the furnace oﬀ again. However,
there is still a large amount of residual heat left in the ducts, and the hot air from the
vents on the ground may not all have risen up to the level of the thermostat. This
means that after the furnace turns oﬀ, the house may continue to get hotter, maybe
even to uncomfortable levels.
So the furnace turns oﬀ, the house heats up to 80 degrees, and then the air conditioner
turns on. The temperature of the house cools down to 70 degrees again, and the A/C
turns back oﬀ. However, the house continues to cool down, and then it gets too cold,
and the furnace needs to turn back on.
As we can see from this example, a bang-bang controller, if poorly designed, can cause
big problems, and it can waste lots of energy. To avoid this, we implement the idea
of Hysteresis, which is a set of threshold values that allow for overﬂow outputs.
Implementing hysteresis, our furnace now turns oﬀ when we get to 65 degrees, and
the house slowly warms up to 75 degrees, and doesn't turn on the A/C unit. This is
a far preferable solution.

36.2 Backlash
E.g.: Mechanical gear.

36.3 Dead-Zone
A dead-zone is a kind of non linearity in which the system doesn't respond to the
given input until the input reaches a particular level or it can refer to a condition in
which output becomes zero when the input crosses certain limiting value.

36.4 Inverse Nonlinearities
36.4.1 Inverse Backlash
36.4.2 Inverse Dead-Zone

277

37 Noise Driven Systems
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Noise Driven Systems
The topics in this chapter will rely heavily on topics from a calculus-based
background in probability theory. There currently are no wikibooks available
that contain this information. The reader should be familiar with the following
concepts: Gaussian Random Variables, Mean, Expectation Operation.

37.1 Noise-Driven Systems
Systems frequently have to deal with not only the control input u, but also a random
noise input v. In some disciplines, such as in a study of electrical communication
systems, the noise and the data signal can be added together into a composite input
r = u + v. However, in studying control systems, we can not combine these inputs
together, for a variety of diﬀerent reasons:
3. The control input works to stabilize the system, and the noise input works to destabilize the system.
4. The two inputs are independent random variables.
5. The two inputs may act on the system in completely diﬀerent ways.
As we will show in the next example, it is frequently a good idea to consider the noise
and the control inputs separately:
Example: Consider a moving automobile. The control signals for the automobile
consist of acceleration (gas pedal) and deceleration (brake pedal) inputs acting
on the wheels of the vehicle, and working to create forward motion. The noise
inputs to the system can consist of wind pushing against the vertical faces of the
automobile, rough pavement (or even dirt) under the tires, bugs and debris hitting
the front windshield, etc. As we can see, the control inputs act on the wheels of the
vehicle, while the noise inputs can act on multiple sides of the vehicle, in diﬀerent
ways.

37.2 Probability Refresher
We are going to have a brief refesher here for calculus-based probability, speciﬁcally
focusing on the topics that we will use in the rest of this chapter.

37.2.1 Expectation
The expectation operatior, E, is used to ﬁnd the expected, or mean value of a given
random variable. The expectation operator is deﬁned as:

279

Noise Driven Systems
∫

∞
E[x] = −∞
xfx (x)dx

If we have two variables that are independent of one another, the expectation of their
product is zero.

37.2.2 Covariance
The covariance matrix, Q, is the expectation of a random vector times it's transpose:
E[x(t)x′ (t)] = Q(t)
If we take the value of the x transpose at a diﬀerent point in time, we can calculate out
the covariance as:
E[x(t)x′ (s)] = Q(t)δ(t − s)
Where δ is the impulse function.

37.3 Noise-Driven System Description
We can deﬁne the state equation to a system incorporating a noise vector v:
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t) + H(t)u(t) + B(t)v(t)
For generality, we will discuss the case of a time-variant system. Time-invariant system
results will then be a simpliﬁcation of the time-variant case. Also, we will assume that v is a
gaussian random variable. We do this because physical systems frequently approximate
gaussian processes, and because there is a large body of mathematical tools that we can
use to work with these processes. We will assume our gaussian process has zero-mean.

37.4 Mean System Response
We would like to ﬁnd out how our system will respond to the new noisy input. Every
system iteration will have a diﬀerent response that varies with the noise input, but the
average of all these iterations should converge to a single value.
For the system with zero control input, we have:
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t) + B(t)v(t)
For which we know our general solution is given as:
∫

x(t) = ϕ(t, t0 )x0 + tt0 ϕ(t, τ )B(τ )v(τ )dτ
If we take the expected value of this function, it should give us the expected value of
the output of the system. In other words, we would like to determine what the expected
output of our system is going to be by adding a new, noise input.
∫

E[x(t)] = E[ϕ(t, t0 )x0 ] + E[ tt0 ϕ(t, τ )B(τ )v(τ )dτ ]

280

System Covariance
In the second term of this equation, neither φ nor B are random variables, and therefore
they can come outside of the expectaion operation. Since v is zero-mean, the expectation
of it is zero. Therefore, the second term is zero. In the ﬁrst equation, φ is not a random
variable, but x0 does create a dependancy on the output of x(t), and we need to take the
expectation of it. This means that:
E[x(t)] = ϕ(t, t0 )E[x0 ]
In other words, the expected output of the system is, on average, the value that the output
would be if there were no noise. Notice that if our noise vector v was not zero-mean, and
if it was not gaussian, this result would not hold.

37.5 System Covariance
We are now going to analyze the covariance of the system with a noisy input. We multiply
our system solution by its transpose, and take the expectation: (this equation is long and
might break onto multiple lines)
∫

∫

E[x(t)x′ (t)] = E[ϕ(t, t0 )x0 + tt0 ϕ(τ, t0 )B(τ )v(τ )dτ ]E[(ϕ(t, t0 )x0 + tt0 ϕ(τ, t0 )B(τ )v(τ )dτ )′ ]
If we multiply this out term by term, and cancel out the expectations that have a zerovalue, we get the following result:
E[x(t)x′ (t)] = ϕ(t, t0 )E[x0 x′0 ]ϕ′ (t, t0 ) = P
We call this result P, and we can ﬁnd the ﬁrst derivative of P by using the chain-rule:
P ′ (t) = A(t)ϕ(t, t0 )P0 ϕ(t, t0 ) + ϕ(t, t0 )P0 ϕ′ (t, t0 )A′ (t)
Where
P0 = E[x0 x′0 ]
We can reduce this to:
P ′ (t) = A(t)P (t) + P (t)A′ (t) + B(t)Q(t)B ′ (t)
In other words, we can analyze the system without needing to calculate the state-transition
matrix. This is a good thing, because it can often be very diﬃcult to calculate the statetransition matrix.

37.6 Alternate Analysis
Let us look again at our general solution:
∫

x(t) = ϕ(t, t0 )x(t0 ) + tt0 ϕ(t, τ )B(τ )v(τ )dτ
We can run into a problem because in a gaussian distribution, especially systems with high
variance (especially systems with inﬁnite variance), the value of v can momentarily become
undeﬁned (approach inﬁnity), which will cause the value of x to likewise become undeﬁned
at certain points. This is unacceptable, and makes further analysis of this problem diﬃcult.
Let us look again at our original equation, with zero control input:

281

Noise Driven Systems
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t) + B(t)v(t)
We can multiply both sides by dt, and get the following result:
dx = A(t)x(t)dt + B(t)v(t)dt
This new term, dw, is a random process known as a Weiner Process, which the result
of transforming a gaussian process in this manner.
We can deﬁne a new diﬀerential, dw(t), which is an inﬁnitesimal function of time as:
dw(t) = v(t)dt
Now, we can integrate both sides of this equation:
∫

∫

x(t) = x(t0 ) + tt0 A(τ )x(τ )dτ + tt0 B(τ )dw(τ ) w:Ito Calculus1 However, this leads us to an
unusual place, and one for which we are (probably) not prepared to continue further: in
the third term on the left-hand side, we are attempting to integrate with respect to a
function, not a variable. In this instance, the standard Riemann integrals that we are all
familiar with cannot solve this equation. There are advanced techniques known as Ito
Calculus however that can solve this equation, but these methods are currently outside
the scope of this book.

1

282

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ito%20Calculus

38 Appendix: Physical Models
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Physical Models

38.1 Physical Models
This page will serve as a refresher for various diﬀerent engineering disciplines on how
physical devices are modeled. Models will be displayed in both time-domain and Laplacedomain input/output characteristics. The only information that is going to be displayed
here will be the ones that are contributed by knowledgeable contributors.

38.2 Electrical Systems
For more information about electric circuits and circuit elements, see the following
books:
Circuit Theorya
Electronicsb
a
b

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Circuit%20Theory
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Electronics

Component
Resistor
Capacitor
Inductor

Time-Domain
R
i = C dv
dt
di
v = L dt

Laplace
R
1
G(s) = sC
G(s) = sL

Fourier
R
1
G(jω) = jωC
G(jω) = jωL

38.3 Mechanical Systems
38.4 Civil/Construction Systems
38.5 Chemical Systems

283

39 Appendix: Z Transform Mappings
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Z Transform Mappings

39.1 Z Transform Mappings
There are a number of diﬀerent mappings that can be used to convert a system from the
complex Laplace domain into the Z-Domain. None of these mappings are perfect, and
every mapping requires a speciﬁc starting condition, and focuses on a speciﬁc aspect to
reproduce faithfully. One such mapping that has already been discussed is the bilinear
transform, which, along with prewarping, can faithfully map the various regions in the
s-plane into the corresponding regions in the z-plane. We will discuss some other potential
mappings in this chapter, and we will discuss the pros and cons of each.

39.2 Bilinear Transform
The Bilinear transform converts from the Z-domain to the complex W domain. The W
domain is not the same as the Laplace domain, although there are some similarities. Here
are some of the similiarities between the Laplace domain and the W domain:
1. Stable poles are in the Left-Half Plane
2. Unstable poles are in the right-half plane
3. Marginally stable poles are on the vertical, imaginary axis
With that said, the bilinear transform can be deﬁned as follows:
[Bilinear Transform]
w = T2 z−1
z+1
[Inverse Bilinear Transform]
w/2)
z = 1+(T
1−(T w/2)

Graphically, we can show that the bilinear transform operates as follows:

285

Appendix: Z Transform Mappings

Figure 122

39.2.1 Prewarping
The W domain is not the same as the Laplace domain, but if we employ the process of
prewarping before we take the bilinear transform, we can make our results match more
closely to the desired Laplace Domain representation.
Using prewarping, we can show the eﬀect of the bilinear transform graphically:

Figure 123

286

Matched Z-Transform
The shape of the graph before and after prewarping is the same as it is without prewarping.
However, the destination domain is the S-domain, not the W-domain.

39.3 Matched Z-Transform
If we have a function in the laplace domain that has been decomposed using partial fraction
expansion, we generally have an equation in the form:
A
B
C
Y (s) = s+α
+ s+α
+ s+α
+ ...
1
2
3

And once we are in this form, we can make a direct conversion between the s and z planes
using the following mapping:
[Matched Z Transform]
s + α = 1 − z −1 e−αT
Pro
A good direct mapping in terms of s and a single coeﬃcient
Con
requires the Laplace-domain function be decomposed using partial fraction expansion.

39.4 Simpson's Rule
[Simpson's Rule]

s=

3
z2 − 1
T z 2 + 4z 1 + 1

CON
Essentially multiplies the order of the transfer function by a factor of 2. This makes things
diﬃcult when you are trying to physically implement the system. It has been shown that
this transform produces unstable roots (outside of unit unit circle).

39.5 (w, v) Transform
Given the following system:
Y (s) = G(s, z, z α )X(s)
Then:
w = T2 z−1
z+1

287

Appendix: Z Transform Mappings
v(α) = 1 − α(1 − z −1 ) + α(α−1)
(1 − z −1 )2
z
And:
[

x(0)
Y (z) = G(w, z, v(α)) X(z) − 1+z
−1

]

[(w, v) Transform]

Pro
Directly maps a function in terms of z and s, into a function in terms of only z.
Con
Requires a function that is already in terms of s, z and α.

39.6 Z-Forms

288

40 Appendix: Transforms
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Transforms Appendix

40.1 Laplace Transform
w:Laplace Transform1
When we talk about the Laplace transform, we are actually talking about the version of
the Laplace transform known as the unilinear Laplace Transform. The other version,
the Bilinear Laplace Transform (not related to the Bilinear Transform, below) is not
used in this book.
The Laplace Transform is deﬁned as:
[Laplace Transform]
∫∞

F (s) = L[f (t)] = −∞ x(t)e−st dt
And the Inverse Laplace Transform is deﬁned as:
[Inverse Laplace Transform]
1 ∫ σ+j∞

f (t) = L−1 {F (s)} = 2πj σ−j∞ X(s)est ds

40.1.1 Table of Laplace Transforms
This is a table of common laplace transforms.
dhunparserurl Engineering Tables/Laplace Transform Table

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

1

Time Domain
x(t) = L−1 {X(s)}
1 ∫ σ+j∞
st
2πj σ−j∞ X(s)e ds
δ(t)
δ(t − a)
u(t)
u(t − a)
tu(t)
tn u(t)
√1 u(t)
πt

Laplace Domain
X(s) = L {x(t)}
∫∞
−st dt
−∞ x(t)e
1
e−as
1
s
e−as
s
1
s2
n!
sn+1
1
√
s

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace%20Transform

289

Appendix: Transforms

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Time Domain
x(t) = L−1 {X(s)}
eat u(t)
tn eat u(t)
cos(ωt)u(t)
sin(ωt)u(t)
cosh(ωt)u(t)
sinh(ωt)u(t)
eat cos(ωt)u(t)
eat sin(ωt)u(t)
1
(sin ωt − ωt cos ωt)
2ω 3
t
2ω sin ωt

19

1
2ω (sin ωt + ωt cos ωt)

Laplace Domain
X(s) = L {x(t)}
1
s−a
n!
(s−a)n+1
s
s2 +ω 2
ω
s2 +ω 2
s
s2 −ω 2
ω
s2 −ω 2
s−a
(s−a)2 +ω 2
ω
(s−a)2 +ω 2
1
(s2 +ω 2 )2
s
(s2 +ω 2 )2
s2
(s2 +ω 2 )2

40.1.2 Properties of the Laplace Transform
This is a table of the most important properties of the laplace transform.
dhunparserurl Engineering Tables/Laplace Transform Properties
Property
Linearity
Diﬀerentiation

Frequency Division
Frequency Integration
Time Integration
Scaling
Initial value theorem
Final value theorem
Frequency Shifts
Time Shifts
Convolution Theorem
Where:
f (t) = L−1 {F (s)}
g(t) = L−1 {G(s)}
s = σ + jω

290

Deﬁnition
L {af (t) + bg(t)} = aF (s) + bG(s)
L{f ′ } = sL{f } − f (0− )
′′
2
−
′ −
L{f
{ }=
} s L{f } − sf (0 ) − f (0 )
(n)
n
n−1
−
L f
= s L{f } − s
f (0 ) − · · · − f (n−1) (0− )
L{tf (t)} = −F ′ (s)
n (n)
L{t{n f (t)}
} =∫(−1) F (s)
L f (t)
= s∞ F (σ) dσ
t
{∫

}

L 0t f (τ ) dτ = L {u(t) ∗ f (t)} = 1s F (s)
( )
L {f (at)} = a1 F as
f (0+ ) = lims→∞ sF (s)
f (∞) = lims→0 sF (s)
{
}
L eat f (t) = F (s − a)
L−1 {F (s − a)} = eat f (t)
L {f (t − a)u(t − a)} = e−as F (s)
L−1 {e−as F (s)} = f (t − a)u(t − a)
L{f (t) ∗ g(t)} = F (s)G(s)

Fourier Transform

40.1.3 Convergence of the Laplace Integral
40.1.4 Properties of the Laplace Transform

40.2 Fourier Transform
w:Fourier Transform2
The Fourier Transform is used to break a time-domain signal into its frequency domain
components. The Fourier Transform is very closely related to the Laplace Transform, and
is only used in place of the Laplace transform when the system is being analyzed in a
frequency context.
The Fourier Transform is deﬁned as:
[Fourier Transform]
∫∞

F (jω) = F[f (t)] = 0 f (t)e−jωt dt
And the Inverse Fourier Transform is deﬁned as:
[Inverse Fourier Transform]
1 ∫∞

f (t) = F −1 {F (jω)} = 2π −∞ F (jω)e−jωt dω

40.2.1 Table of Fourier Transforms
This is a table of common fourier transforms.
dhunparserurl Engineering Tables/Fourier Transform Table
Time Domain
x(t) = F −1 {X(ω)}
x(t)e−jωt dt

1

X(jω) =

2
3
4
5
6

1
−0.5 + u(t)
δ(t)
δ(t − c)
u(t)

7
8
9
10
11

e−bt u(t) (b > 0)
cos ω0 t
cos(ω0 t + θ)
sin ω0 t
sin(ω0 t + θ)

π [δ(ω
[ + ω0 ) + δ(ω − ω0 )]
]
π e−jθ δ(ω + ω0 ) + ejθ δ(ω − ω0 )
jπ [δ(ω
[ + ω0 ) − δ(ω − ω0 )]
]
jπ e−jθ δ(ω + ω0 ) − ejθ δ(ω − ω0 )

12

rect

τ sinc

13
14

2

∫∞

Frequency
Domain
X(ω) =
F {x(t)}
x(t)
=
∫∞
1
X(ω)ejωt dω
2π −∞
2πδ(ω)

−∞

(t)
(τ τ t )
τ sinc 2π
( 2|t| )
1−

τ

rect

1
jω

1
e−jωc
πδ(ω) +
1
jω
1
jω+b

(t)
τ

( τω )
(2π )
2πrect ω
(τ )
τ
2 τω
2

sinc

4π

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier%20Transform

291

Appendix: Transforms
Time Domain
x(t) = F −1 {X(ω)}
15
16

(

)

τ
τt
sinc2 4π
2
−a|t|
e
, ℜ{a} > 0

Frequency
Domain
X(ω) =
F {x(t)}
( 2|ω| )
( )
2π 1 − τ rect ω
τ
2a
a2 +ω 2

Notes:
1. sinc(x)
( )= sin(πx)/(πx)
2. rect τt is the rectangular pulse
function of width τ
3. u(t) is the Heaviside step function
4. δ(t) is the Dirac delta function

40.2.2 Table of Fourier Transform Properties
This is a table of common properties of the fourier transform.
dhunparserurl Engineering Tables/Fourier Transform Properties
Signal

g(t) ≡
∫
√1
2π

∞
G(ω)eiωt dω
−∞

1
2

a · g(t) + b · h(t)
g(t − a)

3

Fourier transFourier transform
form
unitary, angular
unitary, ordinary
frequency
frequency
G(ω)∫≡
G(f
∫ ∞ ) ≡ −i2πf t
∞
−iωt
√1
g(t)e
dt
g(t)e
dt
−∞
−∞
2π

a · G(ω) + b · H(ω)
e−iaω G(ω)

a · G(f ) + b · H(f )
e−i2πaf G(f )

eiat g(t)

G(ω − a)

a
G f − 2π

4

g(at)

1
G
|a|

5

G(t)

g(−ω)

g(−f )

6

dn g(t)
dtn

(iω)n G(ω)

(i2πf )n G(f )

7

tn g(t)

in

8

(g ∗ h)(t)

√
2πG(ω)H(ω)

G(f )H(f )

9

g(t)h(t)

(G∗H)(ω)
√
2π

(G ∗ H)(f )

292

(ω)
a

dn G(ω)
dω n

(

1
G
|a|

)

(f )
a

( i )n dn G(f )
2π

df n

Remarks

Linearity
Shift in time domain
Shift in frequency
domain, dual of 2
If |a| is large, then
g(at) is concentrated around
( )0
1
and |a|
G ω
a
spreads out and
ﬂattens
Duality property of
the Fourier transform. Results from
swapping ”dummy”
variables of t and
ω.
Generalized derivative property of the
Fourier transform
This is the dual to
6
g ∗ h denotes the
convolution of g
and h — this rule
is the convolution
theorem
This is the dual of
8

Z-Transform
Signal

10

For a purely real even function
g(t)
For a purely real odd function
g(t)

11

Fourier transform
unitary, angular
frequency
G(ω) is a purely
real even function
G(ω) is a purely
imaginary odd
function

Fourier transform
unitary, ordinary
frequency
G(f ) is a purely
real even function
G(f ) is a purely
imaginary odd
function

Remarks

40.2.3 Convergence of the Fourier Integral
40.2.4 Properties of the Fourier Transform

40.3 Z-Transform
w:Z-transform3
The Z-transform is used primarily to convert discrete data sets into a continuous representation. The Z-transform is notationally very similar to the star transform, except that the
Z transform does not take explicit account for the sampling period. The Z transform has
a number of uses in the ﬁeld of digital signal processing, and the study of discrete signals
in general, and is useful because Z-transform results are extensively tabulated, whereas
star-transform results are not.
The Z Transform is deﬁned as:
[Z Transform]
X(z) = Z[x[n]] =

∑∞

i=−∞ x[n]z

−n

40.3.1 Inverse Z Transform
The inverse Z Transform is a highly complex transformation, and might be inaccessible to
students without enough background in calculus. However, students who are familiar with
such integrals are encouraged to perform some inverse Z transform calculations, to verify
that the formula produces the tabulated results.
[Inverse Z Transform]
1 H

x[n] = 2πj C X(z)z n−1 dz

40.3.2 Z-Transform Tables
dhunparserurl Engineering Tables/Z Transform Table
Here:

3

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-transform

293

Appendix: Transforms
• u[n] = 1 for n >= 0, u[n] = 0 for n < 0
• δ[n] = 1 for n = 0, δ[n] = 0 otherwise

1
2
3
4
5

Signal, x[n]
δ[n]
δ[n − n0 ]
u[n]
−u[−n − 1]
nu[n]

6

−nu[−n − 1]

7

n2 u[n]

8

−n2 u[−n − 1]

9

n3 u[n]

10
11
12
13

−n3 u[−n − 1]
an u[n]
−an u[−n − 1]
nan u[n]

14

−nan u[−n − 1]

15

n2 an u[n]

16

−n2 an u[−n − 1]

17

cos(ω0 n)u[n]

18

sin(ω0 n)u[n]

19

an cos(ω0 n)u[n]

20

an sin(ω0 n)u[n]

Z-transform, X(z)
1
z −n0
1
1−z −1
1
1−z −1
z −1
(1−z −1 )2
z −1
(1−z −1 )2
z −1 (1+z −1 )
(1−z −1 )3
z −1 (1+z −1 )
(1−z −1 )3
z −1 (1+4z −1 +z −2 )
(1−z −1 )4
z −1 (1+4z −1 +z −2 )
(1−z −1 )4
1
1−az −1
1
1−az −1
az −1
(1−az −1 )2
az −1
(1−az −1 )2
az −1 (1+az −1 )
(1−az −1 )3
az −1 (1+az −1 )
(1−az −1 )3
1−z −1 cos(ω0 )
1−2z −1 cos(ω0 )+z −2
z −1 sin(ω0 )
1−2z −1 cos(ω0 )+z −2
1−az −1 cos(ω0 )
1−2az −1 cos(ω0 )+a2 z −2
az −1 sin(ω0 )
1−2az −1 cos(ω0 )+a2 z −2

ROC
all z
z ̸= 0
|z| > 1
|z| < 1
|z| > 1
|z| < 1
|z| > 1
|z| < 1
|z| > 1
|z| < 1
|z| > |a|
|z| < |a|
|z| > |a|
|z| < |a|
|z| > |a|
|z| < |a|
|z| > 1
|z| > 1
|z| > |a|
|z| > |a|

40.4 Modiﬁed Z-Transform
w:Advanced Z Transform4
The Modiﬁed Z-Transform is similar to the Z-transform, except that the modiﬁed version
allows for the system to be subjected to any arbitrary delay, by design. The Modiﬁed
Z-Transform is very useful when talking about digital systems for which the processing
time of the system is not negligible. For instance, a slow computer system can be modeled
as being an instantaneous system with an output delay.
The modiﬁed Z transform is based oﬀ the delayed Z transform:
[Modiﬁed Z Transform]
{

}

X(z, m) = X(z, ∆)|∆→1−m = Z X(s)e−∆T s |∆→1−m

4

294

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced%20Z%20Transform

Star Transform

40.5 Star Transform
w:Star Transform5
The Star Transform is a discrete transform that has similarities between the Z transform
and the Laplace Transform. In fact, the Star Transform can be said to be nearly analogous
to the Z transform, except that the Star transform explicitly accounts for the sampling
time of the sampler.
The Star Transform is deﬁned as:
[Star Transform]
F ∗ (s) = L∗ [f (t)] =

∑∞

−skT
k=0 f (kT )e

Star transform pairs can be obtained by plugging z = esT into the Z-transform pairs, above.

40.6 Bilinear Transform
The bilinear transform is used to convert an equation in the Z domain into the arbitrary
W domain, with the following properties:
1. roots inside the unit circle in the Z-domain will be mapped to roots on the left-half
of the W plane.
2. roots outside the unit circle in the Z-domain will be mapped to roots on the right-half
of the W plane
3. roots on the unit circle in the Z-domain will be mapped onto the vertical axis in the
W domain.
The bilinear transform can therefore be used to convert a Z-domain equation into a
form that can be analyzed using the Routh-Hurwitz criteria. However, it is important
to note that the W-domain is not the same as the complex Laplace S-domain. To
make the output of the bilinear transform equal to the S-domain, the signal must be
prewarped, to account for the non-linear nature of the bilinear transform.
The Bilinear transform can also be used to convert an S-domain system into the Z
domain. Again, the input system must be prewarped prior to applying the bilinear
transform, or else the results will not be correct.
The Bilinear transform is governed by the following variable transformations:
[Bilinear Transform]
/2)+w
z = (T
(T /2)−w ,

w = T2 z−1
z+1

Where T is the sampling time of the discrete signal.
Frequencies in the w domain are related to frequencies in the s domain through the following relationship:
ωw = T2 tan

5

(

ωs T
2

)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star%20Transform

295

Appendix: Transforms
This relationship is called the frequency warping characteristic of the bilinear transform. To counter-act the eﬀects of frequency warping, we can pre-warp the Z-domain
equation using the inverse warping characteristic. If the equation is prewarped before it
is transformed, the resulting poles of the system will line up more faithfully with those in
the s-domain.
(

)

[Bilinear Frequency Prewarping]

ω = T2 arctan ωa T2 .
Applying these transformations before applying the bilinear transform actually enables direct conversions between the S-Domain and the Z-Domain. The act of applying one of these
frequency warping characteristics to a function before transforming is called prewarping.

40.7 Wikipedia Resources
• w:Laplace transform6
• w:Fourier transform7
• w:Z-transform8
• w:Star transform9
• w:Bilinear transform10

6
7
8
9
10

296

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace%20transform
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier%20transform
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-transform
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star%20transform
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bilinear%20transform

41 System Representations
dhunparserurl Control Systems/System Representations

41.1 System Representations
This is a table of times when it is appropriate to use each diﬀerent type of system
representation:
Properties
Linear, Distributed
Linear, Lumped
Linear, Time-Invariant, Distributed
Linear, Time-Invariant, Lumped

State-Space
Equations
no
yes
no
yes

Transfer
Function
no
no
yes
yes

Transfer
Matrix
no
no
no
yes

41.2 General Description
These are the general external system descriptions. y is the system output, h is the system
response characteristic, and x is the system input. In the time-variant cases, the general
description is also known as the convolution description.
General Description
Time-Invariant, Non-causal
Time-Invariant, Causal
Time-Variant, Non-Causal
Time-Variant, Causal

∫

∞
y(t) = −∞
h(t − r)x(r)dr
∫t
y(t) = 0 h(t − r)x(r)dr
∫∞
y(t) = −∞
h(t, r)x(r)dr
∫
y(t) = 0t h(t, r)x(r)dr

41.3 State-Space Equations
These are the state-space representations for a system. y is the system output, x is the
internal system state, and u is the system input. The matrices A, B, C, and D are
coeﬃcient matrices.
[Analog State Equations]
State-Space Equations
Time-Invariant
Time-Variant

x′ (t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
y(t) = Cx(t) + Du(t)
x′ (t) = A(t)x(t) + B(t)u(t)
y(t) = C(t)x(t) + D(t)u(t)

297

System Representations
These are the digital versions of the equations listed above. All the variables have the
same meanings, except that the systems are digital.
[Digital State Equations]
State-Space Equations
Time-Invariant
Time-Variant

x′ [t] = Ax[t] + Bu[t]
y[t] = Cx[t] + Du[t]
x′ [t] = A[t]x[t] + B[t]u[t]
y[t] = C[t]x[t] + D[t]u[t]

41.4 Transfer Functions
These are the transfer function descriptions, obtained by using the Laplace Transform or
the Z-Transform on the general system descriptions listed above. Y is the system output,
H is the system transfer function, and X is the system input.
[Analog Transfer Function]
Transfer Function
Y (s) = H(s)X(s)
[Digital Transfer Function]
Transfer Function
Y (z) = H(z)X(z)

41.5 Transfer Matrix
This is the transfer matrix system description. This representation can be obtained by
taking the Laplace or Z transforms of the state-space equations. In the SISO case, these
equations reduce to the transfer function representations listed above. In the MIMO case,
Y is the vector of system outputs, X is the vector of system inputs, and H is the transfer
matrix that relates each input X to each output Y.
[Analog Transfer Matrix]
Transfer Matrix
Y(s) = H(s)X(s)
[Digital Transfer Matrix]
Transfer Matrix
Y(z) = H(z)X(z)

298

42 Matrix Operations
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Matrix Operations
For more about this subject, see:
Linear Algebraa
and
Engineering Analysisb
a
b

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Linear%20Algebra
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis

42.1 Laws of Matrix Algebra
Matrices must be compatible sizes in order for an operation to be valid:
Addition
Matrices must have the same dimensions (same number of rows, same number of columns).
Matrix addition is commutative:
A+B = B +A
Multiplication
Matrices must have the same inner dimensions (the number of columns of the ﬁrst matrix
must equal the number of rows in the second matrix). For instance, if matrix A is n × m,
and matrix B is m × k, then we can multiply:
AB = C
Where C is an n × k matrix. Matrix multiplication is not commutative:
AB ̸= BA
Because it is not commutative, the diﬀerentiation must be made between ”multiplication
on the left”, and ”multiplication on the right”.
Division
There is no such thing as division in matrix algebra, although multiplication of the matrix
inverse performs the same basic function. To ﬁnd an inverse, a matrix must be nonsingular,
and must have a non-zero determinant.

299

Matrix Operations

42.2 Transpose Matrix
The transpose of a matrix, denoted by:
XT
is the matrix where the rows and columns of X are interchanged. In some instances, the
transpose of a matrix is denoted by:
X′
This shorthand notation is used when the superscript T applied to a large number of
matrices in a single equation, and the notation would become too crowded otherwise.
When this notation is used in the book, derivatives will be denoted explicitly with:
d
dt X(t)

42.3 Determinant
The determinant of a matrix it is a scalar value. It is denoted similarly to absolute-value
in scalars:
|X|
A matrix has an inverse if the matrix is square, and if the determinant of the matrix is
non-zero.

42.4 Inverse
The inverse of a matrix A, which we will denote here by ”B” is any matrix that satisﬁes
the following equation:
AB = BA = I
Matrices that have such a companion are known as ”invertible” matrices, or ”non-singular”
matrices. Matrices which do not have an inverse that satisﬁes this equation are called
”singular” or ”non-invertable”.
An inverse can be computed in a number of diﬀerent ways:
1. Append the matrix A with the Identity matrix of the same size. Use row-reductions
to make the left side of the matrice an identity. The right side of the appended matrix
will then be the inverse:
[A|I] → [I|B]
2. The inverse matrix is given by the adjoint matrix divided by the determinant. The
adjoint matrix is the transpose of the cofactor matrix.
A−1 =

300

adj(A)
|A|

Eigenvalues
3. The inverse can be calculated from the Cayley-Hamilton Theorem.

42.5 Eigenvalues
The eigenvalues of a matrix, denoted by the Greek letter lambda λ, are the solutions
to the characteristic equation of the matrix:
|X − λI| = 0
Eigenvalues only exist for square matrices. Non-square matrices do not have eigenvalues.
If the matrix X is a real matrix, the eigenvalues will either be all real, or else there will be
complex conjugate pairs.

42.6 Eigenvectors
The eigenvectors of a matrix are the nullspace solutions of the characteristic equation:
(X − λi I)vi = 0
There is at least one distinct eigenvector for every distinct eigenvalue. Multiples of an
eigenvector are also themselves eigenvectors. However, eigenvalues that are not linearly
independent are called ”non-distinct” eigenvectors, and can be ignored.

42.7 Left-Eigenvectors
Left Eigenvectors are the right-hand nullspace solutions to the characteristic equation:
wi (A − λi I) = 0
These are also the rows of the inverse transition matrix.

42.8 Generalized Eigenvectors
In the case of repeated eigenvalues, there may not be a complete set of n distinct eigenvectors (right or left eigenvectors) associated with those eigenvalues. Generalized eigenvectors
can be generated as follows:
(A − λI)vn+1 = vn
Because generalized eigenvectors are formed in relation to another eigenvector or generalize
eigenvectors, they constitute an ordered set, and should not be used outside of this order.

42.9 Transformation Matrix
The transformation matrix is the matrix of all the eigenvectors, or the ordered sets of
generalized eigenvectors:

301

Matrix Operations
T = [v1 v2 · · · vn ]
The inverse transition matrix is the matrix of the left-eigenvectors:
 ′
w1
 w′ 
 
T −1 =  2 
···

wn′

A matrix can be diagonalized by multiplying by the transition matrix:
A = T DT −1
Or:
T −1 AT = D
If the matrix has an incomplete set of eigenvectors, and therefore a set of generalized eigenvectors, the matrix cannot be diagonalized, but can be converted into Jordan canonical
form:
T −1 AT = J

42.10 MATLAB
The MATLAB programming environment was specially designed for matrix algebra and
manipulation. The following is a brief refresher about how to manipulate matrices in
MATLAB:
Addition
To add two matrices together, use a plus sign (”+”): C = A + B;
Multiplication
To multiply two matrices together use an asterisk (”*”): C = A * B;
If your matrices are not the correct dimensions, MATLAB will issue an error.
Transpose
To ﬁnd the transpose of a matrix, use the apostrophe (” ' ”): C = A';
Determinant
To ﬁnd the determinant, use the det function: d = det(A);
Inverse
To ﬁnd the inverse of a matrix, use the function inv: C = inv(A);
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
To ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix, use the eig command: [E, V] =
eig(A);

302

MATLAB
Where E is a square matrix with the eigenvalues of A in the diagonal entries, and V is the
matrix comprised of the corresponding eigenvectors. If the eigenvalues are not distinct, the
eigenvectors will be repeated. MATLAB will not calculate the generalized eigenvectors.
Left Eigenvectors
To ﬁnd the left eigenvectors, assuming there is a complete set of distinct right-eigenvectors,
we can take the inverse of the eigenvector matrix: [E, V] = eig(A); C = inv(V); The rows
of C will be the left-eigenvectors of the matrix A.
For more information about MATLAB, see the wikibook MATLAB Programming1 .

1

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB%20Programming

303

43 Appendix: MATLAB
dhunparserurl Control Systems/MATLAB

B

Warning

This page would highly beneﬁt from some screenshots of various systems. Users who
have MATLAB or Octave available are highly encouraged to produce some
screenshots for the systems here.

43.1 MATLAB
This page assumes a prior knowledge of the fundamentals of MATLAB. For more
information about MATLAB, see MATLAB Programminga .
a

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB%20Programming

MATLAB is a programming language that is specially designed for the manipulation
of matrices. Because of its computational power, MATLAB is a tool of choice for many
control engineers to design and simulate control systems. This page is going to discuss
using MATLAB for control systems design and analysis. MATLAB has a number of plugin
modules called ”Toolboxes”. Nearly all the functions described below are located in the
control systems toolbox. If your system has the control systems toolbox installed, you
can get more information about the toolbox by typing help control at the MATLAB
prompt.
Also, there is an open-source competitor to MATLAB called Octave. Octave is similar
to MATLAB, but there are also some diﬀerences. This page will focus on MATLAB, but
another page could be added to focus on Octave. As of Sept 10th, 2006, all the MATLAB
commands listed below have been implemented in GNU octave.
This page will use the {{MATLAB CMD}} template to show MATLAB functions that can be
used to perform diﬀerent tasks.
MATLAB is a copyrighted product produced by The Mathworks. For more information about MATLAB and The Mathworks, see Control Systems/Resources1 .

305

Appendix: MATLAB

43.1.1 Input-Output Isolation
In a MIMO system, typically it can be important to isolate a single input-output pair
for analysis. Each input corresponds to a single row in the B matrix, and each output
corresponds to a single column in the C matrix. For instance, to isolate the 2nd input and
the 3rd output, we can create a system:
sys = ss(A, B(:,2), C(3,:), D);
This page will refer to this technique as ”input-output isolation”.

43.2 Step Response
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: step
First, let's take a look at the classical approach, with the following system:
G(s) = s25s+10
+4s+5
This system can eﬀectively be modeled as two vectors of coeﬃcients, NUM and DEN:
NUM = [5, 10] DEN = [1, 4, 5]
Now, we can use the MATLAB step command to produce the step response to this system:
step(NUM, DEN, t);
Where t is a time vector. If no results on the left-hand side are supplied by you, the step
function will automatically produce a graphical plot of the step response. If, however, you
use the following format:
[y, x, t] = step(NUM, DEN, t);
Then MATLAB will not produce a plot automatically, and you will have to produce one
yourself.
Here is a sample screenshot:

Now, let's look at the modern, state-space approach. If we have the matrices A, B, C and
D, we can plug these into the step function, as shown:
step(A, B, C, D);
or, we can optionally include a vector for time, t:
step(A, B, C, D, t);
Again, if we supply results on the left-hand side of the equation, MATLAB will not automatically produce a plot for us.

306

Classical ↔ Modern

This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: plot
If we didn't get an automatic plot, and we want to produce our own, we type:
[y, x, t] = step(NUM, DEN, t);
And then we can create a graph using the plot command:
plot(t, y);
y is the output magnitude of the step response, while x is the internal state of the system
from the state-space equations:
x′ = Ax + Bu
y = Cx + Du

43.3 Classical ↔ Modern
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: tf2ss
MATLAB contains features that can be used to automatically convert to the state-space
representation from the Laplace representation. This function, tf2ss, is used as follows:
[A, B, C, D] = tf2ss(NUM, DEN);
Where NUM and DEN are the coeﬃcient vectors of the numerator and denominator of
the transfer function, respectively.
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: ss2tf
In a similar vein, we can convert from the Laplace domain back to the state-space representation using the ss2tf function, as such:
[NUM, DEN] = ss2tf(A, B, C, D);
Or, if we have more than one input in a vector u, we can write it as follows:
[NUM, DEN] = ss2tf(A, B, C, D, u);
The u parameter must be provided when our system has more than one input, but it does
not need to be provided if we have only 1 input. This form of the equation produces a
transfer function for each separate input. NUM and DEN become 2-D matricies, with each
row being the coeﬃcients for each diﬀerent input.

307

Appendix: MATLAB

43.4 z-Domain Digital Filters
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: filter
Let us now consider a digital system with the following generic transfer function in the Z
domain:
H(z) = n(z)
d(z)
Where n(z) and d(z) are the numerator and denominator polynomials of the transfer
function, respectively. The ﬁlter command can be used to apply an input vector x to the
ﬁlter. The output, y, can be obtained from the following code:
y = ﬁlter(n, d, x);
The word ”ﬁlter” may be a bit of a misnomer in this case, but the fact remains that this
is the method to apply an input to a digital system. Once we have the output magnitude
vector, we can plot it using our plot command:
plot(y);
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: ones
To get the step response of the digital system, we must ﬁrst create a step function using
the ones command:
u = ones(1, N);
Where N is the number of samples that we want to take in our digital system (not to
be confused with ”n”, our numerator coeﬃcient). Once we have produced our unit step
function, we can pass this function through our digital ﬁlter as such:
y = ﬁlter(n, d, u);
And we can plot y:
plot(y);

43.5 State-Space Digital Filters
Likewise, we can analyze a digital system in the state-space representation. If we have the
following digital state relationship:
x[k + 1] = Ax[k] + Bu[k]
y[k] = Cx[k] + Du[k]
We can convert automatically to the pulse response using the ss2tf function, that we used
above:
[NUM, DEN] = ss2tf(A, B, C, D);
Then, we can ﬁlter it with our prepared unit-step sequence vector, u:

308

Root Locus Plots
y = ﬁlter(num, den, u)
this will give us the step response of the digital system in the state-space representation.

43.6 Root Locus Plots
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: rlocus
MATLAB supplies a useful, automatic tool for generating the root-locus graph from a
transfer function: the rlocus command. In the transfer function domain, or the state
space domain respectively, we have the following uses of the function:
rlocus(num, den);
And:
rlocus(A, B, C, D);
These functions will automatically produce root-locus graphs of the system. However, if
we provide left-hand parameters:
[r, K] = rlocus(num, den);
Or:
[r, K] = rlocus(A, B, C, D);
The function won't produce a graph automatically, and you will need to produce one
yourself. There is also an optional additional parameter for gain, K, that can be supplied:
rlocus(num, den, K);
Or:
rlocus(A, B, C, D, K);
If K is not supplied, MATLAB will supply an automatic gain value for you.
Once we have our values [r, K], we can plot a root locus:
plot(r);
The rlocus command cannot be used with MIMO systems, so if your system is a MIMO
system, you must separate out your coeﬃcient matrices to isolate each separate Inputoutput pair, and graph each individually.
Here is a sample screenshot:

309

Appendix: MATLAB

43.7 Digital Root-Locus
Creating a root-locus diagram for a digital system is exactly the same as it is for a continuous system. The only diﬀerence is the interpretation of the results, because the stability
region for digital systems is diﬀerent from the stability region for continuous systems. The
same rlocus function can be used, in the same manner as is used above.

43.8 Bode Plots
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: bode
MATLAB also oﬀers a number of tools for examining the frequency response characteristics
of a system, both using Bode plots, and using Nyquist charts. To construct a Bode plot
from a transfer function, we use the following command:
[mag, phase, omega] = bode(NUM, DEN, omega);
Or:
[mag, phase, omega] = bode(A, B, C, D, u, omega);
Where ”omega” is the frequency vector where the magnitude and phase response points are
analyzed. If we want to convert the magnitude data into decibels, we can use the following
conversion:
magdb = 20 * log10(mag);
This conversion should be known well enough by now that it doesn't require explanation.
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: logspace
When talking about Bode plots in decibels, it makes the most sense (and is the most
common occurrence) to also use a logarithmic frequency scale. To create such a logarithmic
sequence in omega, we use the logspace command, as such:
omega = logspace(a, b, n);
This command produces n points, spaced logarithmicly, from 10a up to 10b .
If we use the bode command without left-hand arguments, MATLAB will produce a graph
of the bode phase and magnitude plots automatically.
The bode command, if used with a MIMO system, will use subplots to produce all the
input-output relationship graphs on a single plot window. for a system with multiple inputs
and multiple outputs, this can become diﬃcult to see clearly. In these cases, it is typically
better to separate out your coeﬃcient matrices to isolate each individual input-output
pair.
Here is a sample screenshot:

310

Lyapunov Equations

43.9 Nyquist Plots
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: nyquist
In addition to the bode plots, we can create nyquist charts by using the nyquist command.
The nyquist command operates in a similar manner to the bode command (and other
commands that we have used so far):
[real, imag, omega] = nyquist(NUM, DEN, omega);
Or: [real, imag, omega] = nyquist(A, B, C, D, u, omega);
Here, ”real” and ”imag” are vectors that contain the real and imaginary parts of each point
of the nyquist diagram. If we don't supply the right-hand arguments, the nyquist command
automatically produces a nyquist plot for us.
Like the bode command, the nyquist command will use subplots to display the inputoutput relations of MIMO systems on a single plot window. If there are multiple inputoutput pairs, it can be diﬃcult to see the individual graphs.
Here is a sample screenshot:

43.10 Lyapunov Equations
43.11 Controllability
A controllability matrix can be constructed using the ctrb command. The controllability
gramian can be constructed using the gram command.

43.12 Observability
An observability matrix can be constructed using the command obsv

43.13 Empirical Gramians
Empirical gramians can be computed for linear and also nonlinear control systems. The
empirical gramian framework emgr allows the computation of the controllability, observability and cross gramian; it is compatible with MATLAB and OCTAVE and does not
require the control systems toolbox.

311

Appendix: MATLAB

43.14 Further reading
• Ogata, Katsuhiko, ”Solving Control Engineering Problems with MATLAB”, Prentice Hall,
New Jersey, 1994.
0130459070
• MATLAB Programming2 .
• http://octave.sourceforge.net/
• MATLAB Category on ControlTheoryPro.com3
• Empirical Gramian Framework4

2
3
4

312

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB%20Programming
http://wikis.controltheorypro.com/index.php?title=Category:MATLAB
http://gramian.de

44 Glossary and List of Equations
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Glossary
The following is a listing of some of the most important terms from the book, along with
a short deﬁnition or description.

44.1 A, B, C
Acceleration Error
The amount of steady state error of the system when stimulated by a unit parabolic input.
Acceleration Error Constant
A system metric that determines that amount of acceleration error in the system.
Adaptive Control
A branch of control theory where controller systems are able to change their response
characteristics over time, as the input characteristics to the system change.
Adaptive Gain
when control gain is varied depending on system state or condition, such as a disturbance
Additivity
A system is additive if a sum of inputs results in a sum of outputs.
Analog System
A system that is continuous in time and magnitude.
ARMA
Autoregressive Moving Average, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoregressive_
moving_average_model
ATO
Analog Timed Output. Control loop output is correlated to a timed contact closure.
A/M
Auto-Manual. Control modes, where auto typically means output is computer-driven,
calculated while manual can be ﬁeld-driven or merely using a static setpoint.
Bilinear Transform
a variant of the Z-transform, see http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital_Signal_
Processing/Bilinear_Transform

313

Glossary and List of Equations
Block Diagram
A visual way to represent a system that displays individual system components as boxes,
and connections between systems as arrows.
Bode Plots
A set of two graphs, a ”magnitude” and a ”phase” graph, that are both plotted on log scale
paper. The magnitude graph is plotted in decibels versus frequency, and the phase graph
is plotted in degrees versus frequency. Used to analyze the frequency characteristics of the
system.
Bounded Input, Bounded Output
BIBO. If the input to the system is ﬁnite, then the output must also be ﬁnite. A condition
for stability.
Cascade
When the output of a control loop is fed to/from another loop.
Causal
A system whose output does not depend on future inputs. All physical systems must be
causal.
Classical Approach
See Classical Controls.
Classical Controls
A control methodology that uses the transform domain to analyze and manipulate the
Input-Output characteristics of a system.
Closed Loop
a controlled system using feedback or feedforward
Compensator
A Control System that augments the shortcomings of another system.
Condition Number
Conditional Stability
A system with variable gain is conditionally stable if it is BIBO stable for certain values
of gain, but not BIBO stable for other values of gain.
Continuous-Time
A system or signal that is deﬁned at all points t.
Control Rate
the rate at which control is computed and any appropriate output sent. Lower bound is
sample rate.
Control System

314

D, E, F
A system or device that manages the behavior of another system or device.
Controller
See Control System.
Convolution
A complex operation on functions deﬁned by the integral of the two functions multiplied
together, and time-shifted.
Convolution Integral
The integral form of the convolution operation.
CQI
Control Quality Index, = 1 − abs(P V − SP )/max[P V max − SP, SP − P V min], 1 being
ideal.
CV
Controlled variable

44.2 D, E, F
Damping Ratio
A constant that determines the damping properties of a system.
Deadtime
time shift between the output change and the related eﬀect (typ. at least one control
sample). One sees ”Lag” used for this action sometimes.
Digital
A system that is both discrete-time, and quantized.
Direct action
target output increase is required to bring the process variable (PV) to setpoint (SP) when
PV is below SP. Thus, PV increases with output increase directly.
Discrete magnitude
See quantized.
Discrete time
A system or signal that is only deﬁned at speciﬁc points in time.
Distributed
A system is distributed if it has both an inﬁnite number of states, and an inﬁnite number
of state variables. See Lumped.
Dynamic

315

Glossary and List of Equations
A system is called dynamic if it doesn't have memory. See Instantaneous, Memory.
Eigenvalues
Solutions to the characteristic equation of a matrix. If the matrix is itself a function of
time, the eigenvalues might be functions of time. In this case, they are frequently called
eigenfunctions.
Eigenvectors
The nullspace vectors of the characteristic equation for particular eigenvalues. Used to
determine state-transitions, among other things. See http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
Control_Systems/Eigenvalues_and_Eigenvectors
Euler's Formula
An equation that relates complex exponentials to complex sinusoids.
Exponential Weighted Average (EWA)
Apportions fractional weight to new and existing data to form a working average. Example
EWA=0.70*EWA+0.30*latest, see Filtering.
External Description
A description of a system that relates the input of the system to the output, without
explicitly accounting for the internal states of the system.
Feedback
The output of the system is passed through some sort of processing unit H, and that result
is fed into the plant as an input.
Feedforward
whwn apriori knowledge is used to forecast at least part of the control response.
Filtering (noise)
Use of signal smoothing techniques to reject undesirable components like noise. Can be as
simple as using exponential weighted averaging on the input.
Final Value Theorem
A theorem that allows the steady-state value of a system to be determined from the transfer
function.
FOH
First order hold
Frequency Response
The response of a system to sinusoids of diﬀerent frequencies. The Fourier Transform of
the impulse response.
Fourier Transform

316

G, H, I
An integral transform, similar to the Laplace Transform, that analyzes the frequency
characteristics of a system.
See http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Waves/Fourier_
Transforms

44.3 G, H, I
Game Theory
A branch of study that is related to control engineering, and especially optimal control.
Multiple competing entities, or ”players” attempt to minimize their own cost, and maximize
the cost of the opponents.
Gain
A constant multiplier in a system that is typically implemented as an ampliﬁer or attenuator. Gain can be changed, but is typically not a function of time. Adaptive control can
use time-adaptive gains that change with time.
General Description
An external description of a system that relates the system output to the system input,
the system response, and a time constant through integration.
Hendrik Wade Bode
Electrical Engineer, did work in control theory and communications. Is primarily remembered in control engineering for his introduction of the bode plot.
Harry Nyquist
Electrical Engineer, did extensive work in controls and information theory. Is remembered
in this book primarily for his introduction of the Nyquist Stability Criterion.
Homogeniety
Property of a system whose scaled input results in an equally scaled output.
Hybrid Systems
Systems which have both analog and digital components.
Impulse
A function denoted δ(t), that is the derivative of the unit step.
Impulse Response
The system output when the system is stimulated by an impulse input. The Inverse
Laplace Transform of the transfer function of the system.
Initial Conditions
The conditions of the system at time t = t0 , where t0 is the ﬁrst time the system is
stimulated.
Initial Value Theorem

317

Glossary and List of Equations
A theorem that allows the initial conditions of the system to be determined from the
Transfer function.
Input-Output Description
See external description.
Instantaneous
A system is instantaneous if the system doesn't have memory, and if the current output
of the system is only dependent on the current input. See Dynamic, Memory.
Integrated Absolute Error (IAE)
absolute error (ideal vs actual performance) is integrated over the analysis period.
Integrated Squared Error (ISE)
squared error (ideal vs actual performance) is integrated over the analysis period.
Integrators
A system pole at the origin of the S-plane. Has the eﬀect of integrating the system input.
Inverse Fourier Transform
An integral transform that converts a function from the frequency domain into the timedomain.
Inverse Laplace Transform
An integral transform that converts a function from the S-domain into the time-domain.
Inverse Z-Transform
An integral transform that converts a function from the Z-domain into the discrete time
domain.

44.4 J, K, L
Lag
The observed process impact from an output is slower than the control rate.
Laplace Transform
An integral transform that converts a function from the time domain into a complex
frequency domain.
Laplace Transform Domain
A complex domain where the Laplace Transform of a function is graphed. The imaginary
part of s is plotted along the vertical axis, and the real part of s is plotted along the
horizontal axis.
Left Eigenvectors

318

M, N, O
Left-hand nullspace solutions to the characteristic equation of a matrix for given eigenvalues. The rows of the inverse transition matrix.
Linear
A system that satisﬁes the superposition principle. See Additive and Homogeneous.
Linear Time-Invariant
LTI. See Linear, and Time-Invariant.
Low Clamp
User-applied lower bound on control output signal.
L/R
Local/Remote operation.
LQR
Linear Quadratic Regulator.
Lumped
A system with a ﬁnite number of states, or a ﬁnite number of state variables.

44.5 M, N, O
Magnitude
the gain component of frequency response. This is often all that is considered in saying a
discrete ﬁlter's response is well matched to the analog's. It is the DC gain at 0 frequency.
Marginal Stability
A system has an oscillatory response, as determined by having imaginary poles or imaginary eigenvalues.
Mason's Rule
see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mason's_rule
MATLAB
Commercial software having a Control Systems toolbox. Also see Octave.
Memory
A system has memory if its current output is dependent on previous and current inputs.
MFAC
Model Free Adaptive Control.
MIMO
A system with multiple inputs and multiple outputs.

319

Glossary and List of Equations
Modern Approach
see modern controls
Modern Controls
A control methodology that uses the state-space representation to analyze and manipulate
the Internal Description of a system.
Modiﬁed Z-Transform
A version of the Z-Transform, expanded to allow for an arbitrary processing delay.
MPC
Model Predictive Control.
MRAC
Model Reference Adaptive Control.
MV
can denote Manipulated variable or Measured variable (not the same)
Natural Frequency
The fundamental frequency of the system, the frequency for which the system's frequency
response is largest.
Negative Feedback
A feedback system where the output signal is subtracted from the input signal, and the
diﬀerence is input to the plant.
The Nyquist Criteria
A necessary and suﬃcient condition of stability that can be derived from Bode plots.
Nonlinear Control
A branch of control engineering that deals exclusively with non-linear systems. We do not
cover nonlinear systems in this book.
OCTAVE
Open-source software having a Control Systems toolbox. Also see MATLAB.
Oﬀset
The discrepancy between desired and actual value after settling. P-only control can give
oﬀset.
Oliver Heaviside
Electrical Engineer, Introduced the Laplace Transform as a tool for control engineering.
Open Loop
when the system is not closed, its behavior has a free-running component rather than
controlled

320

P, Q, R
Optimal Control
A branch of control engineering that deals with the minimization of system cost, or maximization of system performance.
Order
The order of a polynomial is the highest exponent of the independent variable in that
exponent. The order of a system is the order of the Transfer Function's denominator
polynomial.
Output equation
An equation that relates the current system input, and the current system state to the
current system output.
Overshoot
measures the extent of system response against desired (setpoint tracking).

44.6 P, Q, R
Parabolic
A parabolic input is deﬁned by the equation 12 t2 u(t).
Partial Fraction Expansion
A method by which a complex fraction is decomposed into a sum of simple fractions.
Percent Overshoot
PO, the amount by which the step response overshoots the reference value, in percentage
of the reference value.
Phase
the directional component of frequency response, not typically well-matched between a
discrete ﬁlter equivalent to the analog version, especially as frequency approaches the
Nyquist limit. The ﬁnal value in the limit drives system stability, and stems from the
poles and zeros of the characteristic equation.
PID
Proportional-Integral-Derivative
Plant
A central system which has been provided, and must be analyzed or controlled.
PLC
Programmable Logic Controller
Pole

321

Glossary and List of Equations
A value for s that causes the denominator of the transfer function to become zero, and
therefore causes the transfer function itself to approach inﬁnity.
Pole-Zero Form
The transfer function is factored so that the locations of all the poles and zeros are clearly
evident.
Position Error
The amount of steady-state error of a system stimulated by a unit step input.
Position Error Constant
A constant that determines the position error of a system.
Positive Feedback
A feedback system where the system output is added to the system input, and the sum is
input into the plant.
PSD
The power spectral density which shows the distribution of power in the spectrum of a
particular signal.
Pulse Response
The response of a digital system to a unit step input, in terms of the transfer matrix.
PV
Process variable
Quantized
A system is quantized if it can only output certain discrete values.
Quarter-decay
the time or number of control rates required for process overshoot to be limited to within
1/4 of the maximum peak overshoot (PO) after a SP change. If the PO is 25% at sample
time N, this would be time N+k when subsequent PV remains < SP*1.0625, presuming
the process is settling.
Raise-Lower
Output type that works from present position rather than as a completely new computed
spanned output. For R/L, the % change should be applied to the working clamps i.e.
5%(hi clamp-lo clamp).
Ramp
A ramp is deﬁned by the function tu(t).
Reconstructors
A system that converts a digital signal into an analog signal.
Reference Value

322

S, T, U, V
The target input value of a feedback system.
Relaxed
A system is relaxed if the initial conditions are zero.
Reverse action
target output decrease is required to bring the process variable (PV) to setpoint (SP) when
PV is below SP. Thus, PV decreases with output increase.
Rise Time
The amount of time it takes for the step response of the system to reach within a certain
range of the reference value. Typically, this range is 80%.
Robust Control
A branch of control engineering that deals with systems subject to external and internal
noise and disruptions.

44.7 S, T, U, V
Samplers
A system that converts an analog signal into a digital signal.
Sampled-Data Systems
See Hybrid Systems.
Sampling Time
In a discrete system, the sampling time is the amount of time between samples. Reﬂects
the lower bound for Control rate.
SCADA
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition.
S-Domain
The domain of the Laplace Transform of a signal or system.
Second-order System;
Settling Time
The amount of time it takes for the system's oscillatory response to be damped to within
a certain band of the steady-state value. That band is typically 10%.
Signal Flow Diagram
A method of visually representing a system, using arrows to represent the direction of
signals in the system.
SISO

323

Glossary and List of Equations
Single input, single output.
Span
the designed operation region of the item,=high range-low range. Working span can be
smaller if output clamps are used.
Stability
Typically ”BIBO Stability”, a system with a well-behaved input will result in a well-behaved
output. ”Well-behaved” in this sense is arbitrary.
Star Transform
A version of the Laplace Transform that acts on discrete signals. This transform is implemented as an inﬁnite sum.
State Equation
An equation that relates the future states of a system with the current state and the
current system input.
State Transition Matrix
A coeﬃcient matrix, or a matrix function that relates how the system state changes in
response to the system input. In time-invariant systems, the state-transition matrix is the
matrix exponential of the system matrix.
State-Space Equations
A set of equations, typically written in matrix form, that relates the input, the system
state, and the output. Consists of the state equation and the output equation. See
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Control_Systems/State-Space_Equations
State-Variable
A vector that describes the internal state of the system.
Stability
The system output cannot approach inﬁnity as time approaches inﬁnity. See BIBO,
Lyapunov Stability.
Step Response
The response of a system when stimulated by a unit-step input. A unit step is a setpoint
change for setpoint tracking.
Steady State
The output value of the system as time approaches inﬁnity.
Steady State Error
At steady state, the amount by which the system output diﬀers from the reference value.
Superposition
A system satisﬁes the condition of superposition if it is both additive and homogeneous.

324

W, X, Y, Z
System Identiﬁcation
method of trying to identify the system characterization , typically through least squares
analysis of input,output and noise data vectors. May use ARMA type framework.
System Type
The number of ideal integrators in the system.
Time-Invariant
A system is time-invariant if an input time-shifted by an arbitrary delay produces an
output shifted by that same delay.
Transfer Function
The ratio of the system output to its input, in the S-domain. The Laplace Transform of
the function's impulse response.
Transfer Function Matrix
The Laplace transform of the state-space equations of a system, that provides an external
description of a MIMO system.
Uniform Stability
Also ”Uniform BIBO Stability”, a system where an input signal in the range [0, 1] results
in a ﬁnite output from the initial time until inﬁnite time. See http://en.wikibooks.
org/wiki/Control_Systems/Stability.
Unit Step
An input deﬁned by u(t). Practically, a setpoint change.
Unity Feedback
A feedback system where the feedback loop element H has a transfer function of 1.
Velocity Error
The amount of steady-state error when the system is stimulated by a ramp input.
Velocity Error Constant
A constant that determines that amount of velocity error in a system.

44.8 W, X, Y, Z
W-plane
Reference plane used in the bilinear transform.
Wind-up
when the numerics of computed control adjustment can ”wind-up”, yielding control correction with an inappropriate component unless prevented. An example is the ”I” contribution
of PID if output has been disconnected during PID calculation

325

Glossary and List of Equations
Zero
A value for s that causes the numerator of the transfer function to become zero, and
therefore causes the transfer function itself to become zero.
Zero Input Response
The response of a system with zero external input. Relies only on the value of the system
state to produce output.
Zero State Response
The response of the system with zero system state. The output of the system depends
only on the system input.
ZOH
Zero order hold.
Z-Transform
An integral transform that is related to the Laplace transform through a change of
variables. The Z-Transform is used primarily with digital systems. See http://en.
wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital_Signal_Processing/Z_Transform

326

45 List of Equations
dhunparserurl Control Systems/List of Equations
The following is a list of the important equations from the text, arranged by subject.
For more information about these equations, including the meaning of each variable and
symbol, the uses of these functions, or the derivations of these equations, see the relevant
pages in the main text.

45.1 Fundamental Equations
[Euler's Formula]
ejω = cos(ω) + j sin(ω)
[Convolution]
∫∞

(a ∗ b)(t) = −∞ a(τ )b(t − τ )dτ
[Convolution Theorem]
L[f (t) ∗ g(t)] = F (s)G(s)
L[f (t)g(t)] = F (s) ∗ G(s)
[Characteristic Equation]
|A − λI| = 0
Av = λv
wA = λw
[Decibels]
dB = 20 log(C)

45.2 Basic Inputs
{

u(t) =

[Unit Step Function]
0, t < 0
1, t ≥ 0
[Unit Ramp Function]

r(t) = tu(t)

327

List of Equations
[Unit Parabolic Function]
p(t) = 12 t2 u(t)

45.3 Error Constants
[Position Error Constant]
Kp = lims→0 G(s)
Kp = limz→1 G(z)
[Velocity Error Constant]
Kv = lims→0 sG(s)
Kv = limz→1 (z − 1)G(z)
[Acceleration Error Constant]
Ka = lims→0 s2 G(s)
Ka = limz→1 (z − 1)2 G(z)

45.4 System Descriptions
[General System Description]
∫∞

y(t) = −∞ g(t, r)x(r)dr
[Convolution Description]
∫∞

y(t) = x(t) ∗ h(t) = −∞ x(τ )h(t − τ )dτ
[Transfer Function Description]
Y (s) = H(s)X(s)
Y (z) = H(z)X(z)
[State-Space Equations]
x′ (t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
y(t) = Cx(t) + Du(t)
[Transfer Matrix]
C[sI − A]−1 B + D = H(s)
C[zI − A]−1 B + D = H(z)
[Transfer Matrix Description]
Y(s) = H(s)U(s)
Y(z) = H(z)U(z)

328

Feedback Loops
[Mason's Rule]
M = yyout
=
in

∑N
k=1

Mk ∆ k
∆

45.5 Feedback Loops
[Closed-Loop Transfer Function]
KGp(s)
Hcl (s) = 1+KGp(s)Gb(s)

[Open-Loop Transfer Function]
Hol (s) = KGp(s)Gb(s)
[Characteristic Equation]
F (s) = 1 + Hol

45.6 Transforms
[Laplace Transform]
∫∞

F (s) = L[f (t)] = 0 f (t)e−st dt
[Inverse Laplace Transform]
1 ∫ c+i∞ st

f (t) = L−1 {F (s)} = 2π c−i∞ e F (s) ds
[Fourier Transform]
∫∞

F (jω) = F[f (t)] = 0 f (t)e−jωt dt
[Inverse Fourier Transform]
1 ∫∞

f (t) = F −1 {F (jω)} = 2π −∞ F (jω)e−jωt dω
[Star Transform]
F ∗ (s) = L∗ [f (t)] =

∑∞

−siT
i=0 f (iT )e

[Z Transform]
X(z) = Z {x[n]} =

∑∞

i=−∞ x[n]z

−n

[Inverse Z Transform]
1 H

x[n] = Z −1 {X(z)} = 2πj C X(z)z n−1 dz
[Modiﬁed Z Transform]
X(z, m) = Z(x[n], m) =

∑∞

n=−∞ x[n + m − 1]z

−n

329

List of Equations

45.7 Transform Theorems
[Final Value Theorem]
x(∞) = lims→0 sX(s)
x[∞] = limz→1 (z − 1)X(z)
[Initial Value Theorem]
x(0) = lims→∞ sX(s)

45.8 State-Space Methods
[General State Equation Solution]
∫
x(t) = eAt−t0 x(t0 ) + tt0 eA(t−τ ) Bu(τ )dτ
∑n−1 n−1−m
n

x[n] = A x[0] +

m=0 A

Bu[n]

[General Output Equation Solution]
∫
y(t) = CeAt−t0 x(t0 ) + C tt0 eA(t−τ ) Bu(τ )dτ + Du(t)
∑n−1
n−1−m
n

y[n] = CA x[0] +

m=0 CA

Bu[n] + Du[n]

[Time-Variant General Solution]
∫t

x(t) = ϕ(t, t0 )x(t0 ) + t0 ϕ(τ, t0 )B(τ )u(τ )dτ
x[n] = ϕ[n, n0 ]x[t0 ] +

∑n

m=n0 ϕ[n, m + 1]B[m]u[m]

[Impulse Response Matrix]

{

G(t, τ ) =
{

G[n] =

C(τ )ϕ(t, τ )B(τ )
0

CAk−1 N
0

if t ≥ τ
if t < τ

if k > 0
if k ≤ 0

45.9 Root Locus
[The Magnitude Equation]
1 + KG(s)H(s) = 0
1 + KGH(z) = 0
[The Angle Equation]
∠KG(s)H(s) = 180◦
∠KGH(z) = 180◦
[Number of Asymptotes]

330

Lyapunov Stability
Na = P − Z
[Angle of Asymptotes]
π
ϕk = (2k + 1) P −Z

∑

σ0 =

−
P −Z

P

[Origin of Asymptotes]

∑
Z

[Breakaway Point Locations]
G(s)H(s)
= 0 or GH(z)
=0
ds
dz

45.10 Lyapunov Stability
[Lyapunov Equation]
M A + AT M = −N

45.11 Controllers and Compensators
[PID]
D(s) = Kp + Ksi + Kd s
D(z) = Kp + Ki T2

[

z+1
z−1

]

[

+ Kd z−1
Tz

]

331

46 Resources and Further Reading
dhunparserurl Control Systems/Resources

46.1 Wikibooks
A number of wikibooks exist on topics that are (a) prerequisites to this book (b) companion
pieces to and references for this book, and (c) of further interest to people who have
completed reading this book. Below will be a listing of such books, ordered according to
the categories listed above.

46.1.1 Prerequisite Books
• Linear algebra1
• Linear Algebra with Diﬀerential Equations2
• Complex Numbers3
• Calculus4
• Signals and Systems5

46.1.2 Companion Books
• Engineering Analysis6
• Engineering Tables7
• Analog and Digital Conversion8
• MATLAB Programming9

46.1.3 Books for Further Reading
• Signal Processing10
• Digital Signal Processing11
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Linear%20algebra
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Linear%20Algebra%20with%20Differential%20Equations
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Algebra%2FComplex%20Numbers
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Calculus
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signals%20and%20Systems
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Analysis
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Engineering%20Tables
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Analog%20and%20Digital%20Conversion
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/MATLAB%20Programming
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Signal%20Processing
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Digital%20Signal%20Processing

333

Resources and Further Reading
• Communication Systems12
• Embedded Control Systems Design13

46.2 Wikiversity
v:Control Systems14
The Wikiversity project also contains a number of collaborative learning eﬀorts in the
ﬁeld of control systems, and related subjects. As best as possible, we will attempt to list
those eﬀorts here:
• v:Control Systems15
Wikiversity is also a place to host learning materials, such as assignments, tests, and
reading plans. It is the goal of the authors of this book to create such materials for use
in conjunction with this book. As such materials are added to wikiversity, they will be
referenced here.

46.3 Wikipedia
There are a number of Wikipedia articles on the topics covered in this book, and those
articles will be linked to from the appropriate pages of this book. However, some of the
articles that are of general use to the book are:
• w:Control theory16
• w:Control engineering17
• w:Process control18
A complete listing of all Wikipedia articles related to this topic can be found at:
• w:Category:Control theory19 .

46.4 Software
46.4.1 Root Locus
Root-Locus is a free program that was used to create several of the images in this book.
That software can be obtained from the following web address:
http://web.archive.org/20041230124431/www.geocities.com/aseldawy/root_
locus.html
Explicit permission has been granted by the author of the program to include screenshots
on wikibooks. Images generated from the Root-Locus program should be included in
Category:Root Locus Images20 , and appropriately tagged as a screenshot of a free software
program.
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

334

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Communication%20Systems
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Embedded%20Control%20Systems%20Design
https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Control%20Systems
https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Control%20Systems
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control%20theory
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control%20engineering
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process%20control
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category%3AControl%20theory
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/%3ACategory%3ARoot%20Locus%20Images

External Publications

46.4.2 MATLAB
MATLAB, Simulink, the Control Systems Toolbox and the Symbolic Toolbox are trademarks of The MathWorks, Inc. Other product or brand names are trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective holders. For more information about MATLAB, or to purchase a copy, visit:
http://www.themathworks.com
For information about the proper way to refer to MATLAB, please see:
http://www.mathworks.com/company/pressroom/editorial_guidelines.html
All MATLAB code appearing in this book has been released under the terms of the GFDL
by the respective authors. All screenshots, graphs, and images relating to MATLAB have
been produced in Octave, with changes to the original MATLAB code made as necessary.

46.4.3 Octave
Octave is a free open-source alternative program to MATLAB. Octave utilizes a scripting
language that is very similar to that of MATLAB, although there are several diﬀerences.
Most of the basic examples described in this book will work equally well in MATLAB or
Octave, with no changes or only minor changes. For more information, or to download a
copy of Octave, visit:
http://octave.sourceforge.net

46.4.4 Commercial Vendors
The following are some common vendors of control-related hardware and software. These
links are for personal interest only, and do not constitute an oﬃcial endorsement of the
companies by Wikibooks.
• Systems Technology, Inc21
• SimApp - Dynamic Simulation Made Easy22

46.5 External Publications
The following books and resources were used as reference works in the creation of this
wikibook (books listed in alphabetical order).
• Brogan, William L, Modern Control Theory, 3rd Edition, 1991.
0135897637
• Chen, Chi-Tsong, Linear System Theory and Design, 3rd Edition, 1999.
0195117778
• Dorf and Bishop, Modern Control Systems, 10th Edition, Prentice Hall, 2005.
0131277650
21
22

http://www.programcc.com/about.asp
http://www.simapp.com

335

Resources and Further Reading
• Hamming, Richard, Numerical Methods for Scientists and Engineers, 2nd edition, Dover,
1987.
0486652416
• Kalman, R. E., When is a linear control system optimal, ASME Transactions, Journal of
Basic Engineering, 1964
• Kalman, R. E., On the General Theory of Control Systems, IRE Transactions on Automatic Control, Volume 4, Issue 3, p110, 1959. ISSN 0096199X
• Ogata, Katsuhiko, Solving Control Engineering Problems with MATLAB, Prentice Hall,
New Jersey, 1994.
0130459070
• Phillips and Nagle, Digital Control System Analysis and Design, 3rd Edition, Prentice
Hall, 1995.
013309832X
The following books and resources are suitable for further reading.
• DiStefano, Stubberud, Williams, Schaum's Outline Series Feedback and Control Systems,
2nd Edition, 1997.
0070170479
• Franklin, Powell, Workman, Digital Control of Dynamic Systems, 3rd Edition, 1997.
9780201820546
• Brosilow, Joseph, Techniques of Model-Based Control, 2002.
013028078X

46.6 External Resources
• IEEE Control Systems Society23
• ControlTheoryPro.com24 A place for controls theory, application, and modeling help.
• University of Michigan Chemical Engineering Process Dynamics and Controls Open Textbook25

23
24
25

336

http://www.ieeecss.org/
http://wikis.ControlTheoryPro.com
http://controls.engin.umich.edu/wiki/index.php/Main_Page

47 Contributors
Edits
2
1
1
1
16
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
5
25
1
3
4
66
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

User
19891
1997kB2
1sfoerster3
Abletried~enwikibooks4
Adrignola5
Agentx3r~enwikibooks6
Ah3kal7
Alej278
Amorini9
Anith 55510
Anon171311
Antonysigma12
Arjunazadi13
Atcovi14
Avicennasis15
Avijit52516
Az156817
Bestable18
Billymac0019
Bo Dorku~enwikibooks20

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:1989
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:1997kB
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:1sfoerster
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Abletried~enwikibooks&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Adrignola
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Agentx3r~enwikibooks&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Ah3kal
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Alej27&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Amorini&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Anith_555&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Anon1713&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Antonysigma&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Arjunazadi&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Atcovi
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Avicennasis
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Avijit525&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Az1568
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Bestable&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Billymac00&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Bo_Dorku~enwikibooks&action=edit&
redlink=1

337

Contributors
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
8
1
1
1
2
1
1
6
9
1

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44

338

Cbarlog21
Chazz22
Chih WANG23
CommonsDelinker24
Congquaner25
Constant31426
DSP-user27
Dagonet Iestwyn28
Danny B.29
DannyS71230
Davetcoleman31
DavidCary32
Deepcyan33
Derby County FC34
Dirk Hünniger35
Discostu536
Doleszki~enwikibooks37
Druzhnik38
Ducleotide39
Edwardvear40
Empato41
Ennui~enwikibooks42
Esj8843
Esteban1644

https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Cbarlog&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Chazz
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Chih_WANG&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:CommonsDelinker
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Congquaner&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Constant314&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:DSP-user
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Dagonet_Iestwyn&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Danny_B.
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:DannyS712
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Davetcoleman&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:DavidCary
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Deepcyan&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Derby_County_FC&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Dirk_H%25C3%25BCnniger
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Discostu5
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Doleszki~enwikibooks&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Druzhnik&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Ducleotide&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Edwardvear&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Empato&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Ennui~enwikibooks&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Esj88&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Esteban16

External Resources
3
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
3
8
1
5
3
1
1
1
2
1
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Federhalter45
Feraudyh46
Fishpi47
Foreign1~enwikibooks48
Fragapanagos49
Frigotoni50
Glaisher51
Hagindaz52
Hammer of Moradin53
Helptry54
Herbythyme55
Herbythyme is the Antichrist of Mumfum56
HethrirBot57
Hippias58
Hyiltiz59
Hypergeek1460
Inductiveload61
Istevie62
JackBot63
JackPotte64
Jakec65
Javalenok66
Jawnsy67
JenVan68
Jfmantis69

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Federhalter
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Feraudyh
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Fishpi&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Foreign1~enwikibooks&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Fragapanagos&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Frigotoni
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Glaisher
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Hagindaz
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Hammer_of_Moradin&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Helptry&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Herbythyme
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Herbythyme_is_the_Antichrist_of_
Mumfum&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:HethrirBot
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Hippias&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Hyiltiz
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Hypergeek14&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Istevie&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:JackBot
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:JackPotte
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Jakec
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Javalenok&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Jawnsy&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:JenVan&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Jfmantis

339

Contributors
25
2
1
4
12
2
1
2
5
3
2
11
4
1
1
1
1
2
1
4
3
1
1
1
1
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94

340

Jguk70
Jianhui6771
Jmah72
Joe Schmedley73
Jomegat74
Josephkiran75
Kayau76
Kevinp277
Leaderboard78
Leisuresuitwally79
Livingthingdan80
Lpkeys81
Macsdev~enwikibooks82
Markcc83
Martin Urbanec84
Mike.lifeguard85
Minorax86
Mintz l87
Mreiki88
Mrjulesd89
Mstachowsky90
Murughendra91
N.masarone92
Napalm Llama93
Neils5194

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Jguk
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Jianhui67
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Jmah&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Joe_Schmedley
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Jomegat
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Josephkiran&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Kayau
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Kevinp2&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Leaderboard
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Leisuresuitwally&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Livingthingdan&action=edit&redlink=
1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Lpkeys&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Macsdev~enwikibooks&action=edit&
redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Markcc&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Martin_Urbanec
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Mike.lifeguard
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Minorax
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Mintz_l
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Mreiki&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Mrjulesd
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Mstachowsky&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Murughendra&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:N.masarone&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Napalm_Llama&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Neils51&action=edit&redlink=1

External Resources
1
5
1
2
14
1
1
8
1
9
34
45
18
2
19
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
3
2

Ninjastrikers95
Nithinvgeorge96
Nonstandard97
Nostraticispeak98
Nrs13599
Ojan100
Okashi no kuni101
Panic2k4102
Pedro Fonini103
Pi zero104
Pierre5018105
PokestarFan106
QuiteUnusual107
Razr Nation108
Recent Runes109
Redberry76110
Renamed user wZdBmxEPfs111
Rmaax112
Ro890Z113
Roman123~enwikibooks114
Rotlink115
SPat116
Sagie117
Satyabrata118

95
96
97

https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Ninjastrikers
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Nithinvgeorge&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Nonstandard&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Nostraticispeak&action=edit&
98
redlink=1
99 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Nrs135&action=edit&redlink=1
100 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Ojan&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Okashi_no_kuni&action=edit&redlink=
101
1
102 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Panic2k4
103 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Pedro_Fonini
104 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Pi_zero
105 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Pierre5018&action=edit&redlink=1
106 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:PokestarFan
107 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:QuiteUnusual
108 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Razr_Nation
109 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Recent_Runes
110 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Redberry76
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Renamed_user_wZdBmxEPfs&action=
111
edit&redlink=1
112 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Rmaax&action=edit&redlink=1
113 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Ro890Z&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Roman123~enwikibooks&action=edit&
114
redlink=1
115 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Rotlink&action=edit&redlink=1
116 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:SPat
117 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Sagie&action=edit&redlink=1
118 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Satyabrata&action=edit&redlink=1

341

Contributors
1
3
1
1
1
4
1
1
10
1
4
1
2
1
6
4
1
4
2
1
1
3
1
1
1

Sberkane119
ScaAr120
Scruﬀ323121
Sdayal122
Shaﬀers21123
Simoneau124
Sonia125
Sonicwave32126
Spradlig127
Strange quark128
Stïnger129
Supermackin~enwikibooks130
Syum90131
Tdenewiler132
Texvc2LaTeXBot133
Thenub314134
Tickle55135
Tim.greatrex136
Tropicalkitty137
Trunks ishida138
Turkmen139
Ubigene140
Upul141
Van der Hoorn142
Vito Genovese143

119 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Sberkane&action=edit&redlink=1
120 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:ScaAr&action=edit&redlink=1
121 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Scruff323&action=edit&redlink=1
122 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Sdayal&action=edit&redlink=1
123 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Shaffers21&action=edit&redlink=1
124 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Simoneau
125 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Sonia
126 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Sonicwave32
127 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Spradlig
128 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Strange_quark
129 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:St%25C3%25AFnger
130 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Supermackin~enwikibooks
131 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Syum90&action=edit&redlink=1
132 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Tdenewiler&action=edit&redlink=1
133 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Texvc2LaTeXBot
134 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Thenub314
135 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Tickle55&action=edit&redlink=1
136 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Tim.greatrex&action=edit&redlink=1
137 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Tropicalkitty
138 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Trunks_ishida&action=edit&redlink=1
139 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Turkmen
140 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Ubigene&action=edit&redlink=1
141 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Upul
142 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Van_der_Hoorn
143 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Vito_Genovese

342

External Resources
1
1
1823
1
4
1
7
5
1
1
1
3
3
2

Wargo144
Warlock31415145
Whiteknight146
WikiBayer147
Wknight8111148
XMollioTKs149
Xania150
Xris151
YMS152
Yeus153
Z35~enwikibooks154
Zhaopatrick155
Zoomzoom~enwikibooks156
~riley157

144 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Wargo
145 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Warlock31415&action=edit&redlink=1
146 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
147 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:WikiBayer
148 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Wknight8111
149 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:XMollioTKs&action=edit&redlink=1
150 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Xania
151 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Xris&action=edit&redlink=1
152 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:YMS
153 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Yeus&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Z35~enwikibooks&action=edit&
154
redlink=1
155 https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Zhaopatrick&action=edit&redlink=1
https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php%3ftitle=User:Zoomzoom~enwikibooks&action=edit&
156
redlink=1
157 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:~riley

343

List of Figures
• GFDL: Gnu Free Documentation License.
html

http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.

• cc-by-sa-3.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

http://

• cc-by-sa-2.5: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 2.5 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5/

http://

• cc-by-sa-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 2.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/

http://

• cc-by-sa-1.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 1.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/1.0/

http://

• cc-by-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0/
• cc-by-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en
• cc-by-2.5: Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.5/deed.en
• cc-by-3.0: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en
• GPL: GNU General Public License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.txt
• LGPL: GNU Lesser General Public License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.
html
• PD: This image is in the public domain.
• ATTR: The copyright holder of this ﬁle allows anyone to use it for any purpose,
provided that the copyright holder is properly attributed. Redistribution, derivative
work, commercial use, and all other use is permitted.
• EURO: This is the common (reverse) face of a euro coin. The copyright on the design
of the common face of the euro coins belongs to the European Commission. Authorised
is reproduction in a format without relief (drawings, paintings, ﬁlms) provided they
are not detrimental to the image of the euro.
• LFK: Lizenz Freie Kunst. http://artlibre.org/licence/lal/de
• CFR: Copyright free use.

345

List of Figures
• EPL: Eclipse Public License. http://www.eclipse.org/org/documents/epl-v10.
php
Copies of the GPL, the LGPL as well as a GFDL are included in chapter Licenses158 . Please
note that images in the public domain do not require attribution. You may click on the
image numbers in the following table to open the webpage of the images in your webbrower.

158 Chapter 48 on page 355

346

List of Figures

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

18
19

BrightRaven, Gabor commonswiki, Jacek Halicki, JarektBot, Luestling commonswiki, Olivier, Umherirrender
Jules Boilly
Whiteknight159 at English Wikibooks160
Whiteknight161 at English Wikibooks162
Whiteknight163 at English Wikibooks164
Whiteknight165 at English Wikibooks166
Whiteknight167 at English Wikibooks168
Whiteknight169 at English Wikibooks170
Whiteknight171 at English Wikibooks172
Whiteknight173 at English Wikibooks174
Whiteknight175 at English Wikibooks176
Whiteknight177 at English Wikibooks178
Whiteknight179 at English Wikibooks180
Whiteknight181 at English Wikibooks182
Inductiveload183 , Inductiveload184
Spradlig185
Ea91b3dd, Emijrpbot, EugeneZelenko, Glenn, Hazard-Bot,
Ilmari Karonen, JarektBot, MGA73bot2, Severino666 commonswiki
Whiteknight186 at English Wikibooks187
Whiteknight188 at English Wikibooks189

159 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
160 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
161 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
162 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
163 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
164 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
165 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
166 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
167 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
168 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
169 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
170 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
171 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
172 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
173 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
174 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
175 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
176 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
177 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
178 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
179 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
180 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
181 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
182 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
183 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
184 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
185 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/en:User:Spradlig
186 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
187 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
188 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
189 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/

347

List of Figures

20
21
22
23
24

25

26

27

28

29

30
31
32

Whiteknight190 at English Wikibooks191
Whiteknight192 at English Wikibooks193
Whiteknight194 at English Wikibooks195
Whiteknight196 at English Wikibooks197
No machine-readable author provided. Rbj198 assumed
(based on copyright claims)., No machine-readable author
provided. Rbj199 assumed (based on copyright claims).
image source obtained from en:User:Petr.adamek200 (with
permission) and previously saved as PD in PNG format.
touched up a little and converted to SVG by en:User:Rbj201
No machine-readable author provided. Rbj202 assumed
(based on copyright claims)., No machine-readable author
provided. Rbj203 assumed (based on copyright claims).
No machine-readable author provided. Rbj204 assumed
(based on copyright claims)., No machine-readable author
provided. Rbj205 assumed (based on copyright claims).
No machine-readable author provided. Rbj206 assumed
(based on copyright claims)., No machine-readable author
provided. Rbj207 assumed (based on copyright claims).
No machine-readable author provided. Rbj208 assumed
(based on copyright claims)., No machine-readable author
provided. Rbj209 assumed (based on copyright claims).
Whiteknight210 at English Wikibooks211
Whiteknight212 at English Wikibooks213
Inductiveload214 , Inductiveload215

190 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
191 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
192 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
193 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
194 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
195 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
196 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
197 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
198 http://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
199 https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
200 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Petr.adamek
201 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Rbj
202 http://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
203 https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
204 http://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
205 https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
206 http://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
207 https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
208 http://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
209 https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rbj&action=edit&redlink=1
210 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
211 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
212 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
213 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
214 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
215 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload

348

List of Figures

33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

Inductiveload216 , Inductiveload217
Inductiveload218 , Inductiveload219
Inductiveload220 , Inductiveload221
Inductiveload222 , Inductiveload223
Inductiveload224 , Inductiveload225
Inductiveload226 , Inductiveload227
Inductiveload228 , Inductiveload229
Inductiveload230 , Inductiveload231
Inductiveload232 , Inductiveload233
Inductiveload234 , Inductiveload235
Inductiveload236 , Inductiveload237
Inductiveload238 , Inductiveload239
Inductiveload240 , Inductiveload241
Inductiveload242 , Inductiveload243
Inductiveload244 , Inductiveload245
Inductiveload246 , Inductiveload247
Inductiveload248 , Inductiveload249

216 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
217 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
218 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
219 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
220 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
221 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
222 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
223 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
224 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
225 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
226 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
227 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
228 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
229 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
230 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
231 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
232 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
233 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
234 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
235 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
236 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
237 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
238 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
239 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
240 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
241 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
242 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
243 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
244 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
245 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
246 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
247 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
248 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
249 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload

349

List of Figures

50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

Inductiveload250 , Inductiveload251
Inductiveload252 , Inductiveload253
Inductiveload254 , Inductiveload255
Inductiveload256 , Inductiveload257
Inductiveload258 , Inductiveload259
Inductiveload260 , Inductiveload261
Inductiveload262 , Inductiveload263
Inductiveload264 , Inductiveload265
Inductiveload266 , Inductiveload267
Inductiveload268 , Inductiveload269
Inductiveload270 , Inductiveload271
Inductiveload272 , Inductiveload273
Inductiveload274 , Inductiveload275
en:User:Ap276
Dicklyon, JarektBot, Leyo, Ma-Lik, Maksim, McPot
The original uploader was Whiteknight277 at English Wikibooks278 .
Whiteknight279 at English Wikibooks280
Nithinvgeorge281 at English Wikibooks282

250 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
251 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
252 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
253 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
254 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
255 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
256 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
257 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
258 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
259 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
260 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
261 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
262 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
263 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
264 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
265 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
266 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
267 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
268 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
269 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
270 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
271 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
272 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
273 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
274 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
275 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Inductiveload
276 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Ap
277 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
278 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
279 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
280 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
281 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Nithinvgeorge
282 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/

350

List of Figures

68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84

Pierre5018283 , Pierre5018284
Pierre5018285 , Pierre5018286
Pierre5018287 , Pierre5018288
Pierre5018289 , Pierre5018290
Pierre5018291 , Pierre5018292
Pierre5018293 , Pierre5018294
Pierre5018295 , Pierre5018296
Pierre5018297 , Pierre5018298
Pierre5018299 , Pierre5018300
Pierre5018301 , Pierre5018302
Pierre5018303 , Pierre5018304
Pierre5018305 , Pierre5018306
Pierre5018307 , Pierre5018308
Pierre5018309 , Pierre5018310
Pierre5018311 , Pierre5018312
Pierre5018313 , Pierre5018314
Pierre5018315 , Pierre5018316

283 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
284 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
285 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
286 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
287 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
288 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
289 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
290 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
291 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
292 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
293 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
294 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
295 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
296 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
297 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
298 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
299 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
300 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
301 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
302 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
303 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
304 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
305 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
306 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
307 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
308 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
309 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
310 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
311 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
312 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
313 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
314 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
315 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
316 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018

351

List of Figures

85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101

Pierre5018317 , Pierre5018318
Pierre5018319 , Pierre5018320
Pierre5018321 , Pierre5018322
Pierre5018323 , Pierre5018324
Pierre5018325 , Pierre5018326
Pierre5018327 , Pierre5018328
Pierre5018329 , Pierre5018330
Pierre5018331 , Pierre5018332
Pierre5018333 , Pierre5018334
Pierre5018335 , Pierre5018336
Pierre5018337 , Pierre5018338
Pierre5018339 , Pierre5018340
Pierre5018341 , Pierre5018342
Pierre5018343 , Pierre5018344
Pierre5018345 , Pierre5018346
Pierre5018347 , Pierre5018348
Pierre5018349 , Pierre5018350

317 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
318 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
319 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
320 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
321 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
322 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
323 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
324 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
325 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
326 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
327 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
328 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
329 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
330 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
331 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
332 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
333 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
334 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
335 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
336 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
337 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
338 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
339 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
340 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
341 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
342 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
343 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
344 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
345 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
346 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
347 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
348 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
349 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
350 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018

352

List of Figures

102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117

Pierre5018351 , Pierre5018352
Pierre5018353 , Pierre5018354
Pierre5018355 , Pierre5018356
Pierre5018357 , Pierre5018358
Constant314359 , Constant314360
User:Netnet361 , User:Netnet362
User:Netnet363 , User:Netnet364
User:Netnet365 , User:Netnet366
User:Netnet367 , User:Netnet368
User:Netnet369 , User:Netnet370
The original uploader was Whiteknight371 at English Wikibooks372 .
The original uploader was Whiteknight373 at English Wikibooks374 .
The original uploader was Whiteknight375 at English Wikibooks376 .
Warlock31415377 , Warlock31415378
User:Netnet379 , User:Netnet380
User:Netnet381 , User:Netnet382

351 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
352 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
353 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
354 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
355 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
356 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
357 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
358 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Pierre5018
359 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Constant314
360 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Constant314
361 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
362 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
363 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
364 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
365 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
366 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
367 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
368 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
369 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
370 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
371 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
372 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
373 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
374 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
375 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
376 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
http://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Warlock31415&action=edit&redlink=
377
1
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=User:Warlock31415&action=edit&
378
redlink=1
379 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
380 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
381 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
382 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet

353

List of Figures

118
119
120
121
122
123

User:Netnet383 , User:Netnet384
Robo Blazek, Pezinok385
Nithinvgeorge
Whiteknight386 at English Wikibooks387
The original uploader was Whiteknight388 at English Wikibooks389 .
The original uploader was Whiteknight390 at English Wikibooks391 .

383 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
384 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Netnet
385 https://sk.wikipedia.org/wiki/user:robo
386 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
387 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
388 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
389 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
390 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User:Whiteknight
391 https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/

354

48 Licenses
48.1 GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright © 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed. Preamble
The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license for software
and other kinds of works.
The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed
to take away your freedom to share and change the works. By contrast, the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your
freedom to share and change all versions of a program–to make sure
it remains free software for all its users. We, the Free Software Foundation, use the GNU General Public License for most of our software;
it applies also to any other work released this way by its authors. You
can apply it to your programs, too.
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price.
Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have
the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for them
if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you want
it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free
programs, and that you know you can do these things.
To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you
these rights or asking you to surrender the rights. Therefore, you have
certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software, or if you
modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis
or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the same freedoms that
you received. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get
the source code. And you must show them these terms so they know
their rights.
Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with two steps:
(1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) oﬀer you this License
giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify it.
For the developers’ and authors’ protection, the GPL clearly explains
that there is no warranty for this free software. For both users’ and
authors’ sake, the GPL requires that modiﬁed versions be marked as
changed, so that their problems will not be attributed erroneously to
authors of previous versions.
Some devices are designed to deny users access to install or run modiﬁed versions of the software inside them, although the manufacturer
can do so. This is fundamentally incompatible with the aim of protecting users’ freedom to change the software. The systematic pattern of
such abuse occurs in the area of products for individuals to use, which
is precisely where it is most unacceptable. Therefore, we have designed
this version of the GPL to prohibit the practice for those products. If
such problems arise substantially in other domains, we stand ready to
extend this provision to those domains in future versions of the GPL,
as needed to protect the freedom of users.
Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents.
States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to
avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could
make it eﬀectively proprietary. To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modiﬁcation follow. TERMS AND CONDITIONS 0. Deﬁnitions.
“This License” refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public License.
“Copyright” also means copyright-like laws that apply to other kinds
of works, such as semiconductor masks.
“The Program” refers to any copyrightable work licensed under this License. Each licensee is addressed as “you”. “Licensees” and “recipients”
may be individuals or organizations.
To “modify” a work means to copy from or adapt all or part of the work
in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the making of
an exact copy. The resulting work is called a “modiﬁed version” of the
earlier work or a work “based on” the earlier work.
A “covered work” means either the unmodiﬁed Program or a work
based on the Program.
To “propagate” a work means to do anything with it that, without permission, would make you directly or secondarily liable for infringement
under applicable copyright law, except executing it on a computer or
modifying a private copy. Propagation includes copying, distribution
(with or without modiﬁcation), making available to the public, and in
some countries other activities as well.
To “convey” a work means any kind of propagation that enables other
parties to make or receive copies. Mere interaction with a user through
a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is not conveying.
An interactive user interface displays “Appropriate Legal Notices” to
the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently visible feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and (2) tells the
user that there is no warranty for the work (except to the extent that
warranties are provided), that licensees may convey the work under
this License, and how to view a copy of this License. If the interface presents a list of user commands or options, such as a menu, a
prominent item in the list meets this criterion. 1. Source Code.
The “source code” for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modiﬁcations to it. “Object code” means any non-source form
of a work.
A “Standard Interface” means an interface that either is an oﬃcial
standard deﬁned by a recognized standards body, or, in the case of
interfaces speciﬁed for a particular programming language, one that is
widely used among developers working in that language.
The “System Libraries” of an executable work include anything, other
than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal form of
packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that Major
Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with that
Major Component, or to implement a Standard Interface for which an
implementation is available to the public in source code form. A “Major Component”, in this context, means a major essential component
(kernel, window system, and so on) of the speciﬁc operating system (if
any) on which the executable work runs, or a compiler used to produce
the work, or an object code interpreter used to run it.

The “Corresponding Source” for a work in object code form means all
the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable
work) run the object code and to modify the work, including scripts
to control those activities. However, it does not include the work’s
System Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally available free
programs which are used unmodiﬁed in performing those activities but
which are not part of the work. For example, Corresponding Source
includes interface deﬁnition ﬁles associated with source ﬁles for the
work, and the source code for shared libraries and dynamically linked
subprograms that the work is speciﬁcally designed to require, such as
by intimate data communication or control ﬂow between those subprograms and other parts of the work.
The Corresponding Source need not include anything that users can regenerate automatically from other parts of the Corresponding Source.
The Corresponding Source for a work in source code form is that same
work. 2. Basic Permissions.
All rights granted under this License are granted for the term of copyright on the Program, and are irrevocable provided the stated conditions are met. This License explicitly aﬃrms your unlimited permission to run the unmodiﬁed Program. The output from running a
covered work is covered by this License only if the output, given its
content, constitutes a covered work. This License acknowledges your
rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyright law.
You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do not convey, without conditions so long as your license otherwise remains in
force. You may convey covered works to others for the sole purpose
of having them make modiﬁcations exclusively for you, or provide you
with facilities for running those works, provided that you comply with
the terms of this License in conveying all material for which you do not
control copyright. Those thus making or running the covered works
for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your direction
and control, on terms that prohibit them from making any copies of
your copyrighted material outside their relationship with you.
Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under
the conditions stated below. Sublicensing is not allowed; section 10
makes it unnecessary. 3. Protecting Users’ Legal Rights From AntiCircumvention Law.
No covered work shall be deemed part of an eﬀective technological
measure under any applicable law fulﬁlling obligations under article
11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, or
similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such measures.
When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power to forbid
circumvention of technological measures to the extent such circumvention is eﬀected by exercising rights under this License with respect
to the covered work, and you disclaim any intention to limit operation or modiﬁcation of the work as a means of enforcing, against the
work’s users, your or third parties’ legal rights to forbid circumvention
of technological measures. 4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.
You may convey verbatim copies of the Program’s source code as you
receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice; keep intact all notices stating that this License and any non-permissive terms
added in accord with section 7 apply to the code; keep intact all notices of the absence of any warranty; and give all recipients a copy of
this License along with the Program.
You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey, and you may oﬀer support or warranty protection for a fee. 5.
Conveying Modiﬁed Source Versions.
You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modiﬁcations
to produce it from the Program, in the form of source code under the
terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:
* a) The work must carry prominent notices stating that you modiﬁed
it, and giving a relevant date. * b) The work must carry prominent
notices stating that it is released under this License and any conditions
added under section 7. This requirement modiﬁes the requirement in
section 4 to “keep intact all notices”. * c) You must license the entire
work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes into possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with any
applicable section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work, and
all its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This License gives
no permission to license the work in any other way, but it does not
invalidate such permission if you have separately received it. * d) If
the work has interactive user interfaces, each must display Appropriate
Legal Notices; however, if the Program has interactive interfaces that
do not display Appropriate Legal Notices, your work need not make
them do so.
A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent
works, which are not by their nature extensions of the covered work,
and which are not combined with it such as to form a larger program,
in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an
“aggregate” if the compilation and its resulting copyright are not used
to limit the access or legal rights of the compilation’s users beyond
what the individual works permit. Inclusion of a covered work in an
aggregate does not cause this License to apply to the other parts of
the aggregate. 6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.
You may convey a covered work in object code form under the terms of
sections 4 and 5, provided that you also convey the machine-readable
Corresponding Source under the terms of this License, in one of these
ways:
* a) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by the Corresponding Source ﬁxed on a durable physical medium customarily used
for software interchange. * b) Convey the object code in, or embodied
in, a physical product (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by a written oﬀer, valid for at least three years and valid
for as long as you oﬀer spare parts or customer support for that product model, to give anyone who possesses the object code either (1) a
copy of the Corresponding Source for all the software in the product
that is covered by this License, on a durable physical medium customarily used for software interchange, for a price no more than your
reasonable cost of physically performing this conveying of source, or
(2) access to copy the Corresponding Source from a network server at
no charge. * c) Convey individual copies of the object code with a
copy of the written oﬀer to provide the Corresponding Source. This
alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercially, and only
if you received the object code with such an oﬀer, in accord with subsection 6b. * d) Convey the object code by oﬀering access from a
designated place (gratis or for a charge), and oﬀer equivalent access to
the Corresponding Source in the same way through the same place at
no further charge. You need not require recipients to copy the Corresponding Source along with the object code. If the place to copy the
object code is a network server, the Corresponding Source may be on a

diﬀerent server (operated by you or a third party) that supports equivalent copying facilities, provided you maintain clear directions next to
the object code saying where to ﬁnd the Corresponding Source. Regardless of what server hosts the Corresponding Source, you remain
obligated to ensure that it is available for as long as needed to satisfy
these requirements. * e) Convey the object code using peer-to-peer
transmission, provided you inform other peers where the object code
and Corresponding Source of the work are being oﬀered to the general
public at no charge under subsection 6d.
A separable portion of the object code, whose source code is excluded
from the Corresponding Source as a System Library, need not be included in conveying the object code work.
A “User Product” is either (1) a “consumer product”, which means any
tangible personal property which is normally used for personal, family,
or household purposes, or (2) anything designed or sold for incorporation into a dwelling. In determining whether a product is a consumer
product, doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of coverage. For a
particular product received by a particular user, “normally used” refers
to a typical or common use of that class of product, regardless of the
status of the particular user or of the way in which the particular
user actually uses, or expects or is expected to use, the product. A
product is a consumer product regardless of whether the product has
substantial commercial, industrial or non-consumer uses, unless such
uses represent the only signiﬁcant mode of use of the product.
“Installation Information” for a User Product means any methods, procedures, authorization keys, or other information required to install
and execute modiﬁed versions of a covered work in that User Product
from a modiﬁed version of its Corresponding Source. The information
must suﬃce to ensure that the continued functioning of the modiﬁed
object code is in no case prevented or interfered with solely because
modiﬁcation has been made.
If you convey an object code work under this section in, or with, or
speciﬁcally for use in, a User Product, and the conveying occurs as
part of a transaction in which the right of possession and use of the
User Product is transferred to the recipient in perpetuity or for a ﬁxed
term (regardless of how the transaction is characterized), the Corresponding Source conveyed under this section must be accompanied by
the Installation Information. But this requirement does not apply if
neither you nor any third party retains the ability to install modiﬁed object code on the User Product (for example, the work has been
installed in ROM).
The requirement to provide Installation Information does not include
a requirement to continue to provide support service, warranty, or updates for a work that has been modiﬁed or installed by the recipient,
or for the User Product in which it has been modiﬁed or installed.
Access to a network may be denied when the modiﬁcation itself materially and adversely aﬀects the operation of the network or violates
the rules and protocols for communication across the network.
Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation Information provided, in accord with this section must be in a format that is publicly
documented (and with an implementation available to the public in
source code form), and must require no special password or key for
unpacking, reading or copying. 7. Additional Terms.
“Additional permissions” are terms that supplement the terms of this
License by making exceptions from one or more of its conditions. Additional permissions that are applicable to the entire Program shall be
treated as though they were included in this License, to the extent that
they are valid under applicable law. If additional permissions apply
only to part of the Program, that part may be used separately under
those permissions, but the entire Program remains governed by this
License without regard to the additional permissions.
When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your option
remove any additional permissions from that copy, or from any part
of it. (Additional permissions may be written to require their own
removal in certain cases when you modify the work.) You may place
additional permissions on material, added by you to a covered work,
for which you have or can give appropriate copyright permission.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for material you
add to a covered work, you may (if authorized by the copyright holders
of that material) supplement the terms of this License with terms:
* a) Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability diﬀerently from the
terms of sections 15 and 16 of this License; or * b) Requiring preservation of speciﬁed reasonable legal notices or author attributions in
that material or in the Appropriate Legal Notices displayed by works
containing it; or * c) Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of
that material, or requiring that modiﬁed versions of such material be
marked in reasonable ways as diﬀerent from the original version; or *
d) Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of licensors or authors of the material; or * e) Declining to grant rights under trademark
law for use of some trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or *
f) Requiring indemniﬁcation of licensors and authors of that material
by anyone who conveys the material (or modiﬁed versions of it) with
contractual assumptions of liability to the recipient, for any liability
that these contractual assumptions directly impose on those licensors
and authors.
All other non-permissive additional terms are considered “further restrictions” within the meaning of section 10. If the Program as you
received it, or any part of it, contains a notice stating that it is governed by this License along with a term that is a further restriction,
you may remove that term. If a license document contains a further
restriction but permits relicensing or conveying under this License, you
may add to a covered work material governed by the terms of that license document, provided that the further restriction does not survive
such relicensing or conveying.
If you add terms to a covered work in accord with this section, you
must place, in the relevant source ﬁles, a statement of the additional
terms that apply to those ﬁles, or a notice indicating where to ﬁnd the
applicable terms.
Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive, may be stated in the
form of a separately written license, or stated as exceptions; the above
requirements apply either way. 8. Termination.
You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as expressly
provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to propagate or
modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under
this License (including any patent licenses granted under the third
paragraph of section 11).
However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license
from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and ﬁnally terminates

your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means prior to 60 days
after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated
permanently if the copyright holder notiﬁes you of the violation by
some reasonable means, this is the ﬁrst time you have received notice
of violation of this License (for any work) from that copyright holder,
and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the
notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the
licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under
this License. If your rights have been terminated and not permanently
reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new licenses for the same
material under section 10. 9. Acceptance Not Required for Having
Copies.
You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or run
a copy of the Program. Ancillary propagation of a covered work occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer transmission to
receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance. However, nothing
other than this License grants you permission to propagate or modify
any covered work. These actions infringe copyright if you do not accept
this License. Therefore, by modifying or propagating a covered work,
you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so. 10. Automatic
Licensing of Downstream Recipients.
Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work, subject to this License. You are not responsible for
enforcing compliance by third parties with this License.
An “entity transaction” is a transaction transferring control of an organization, or substantially all assets of one, or subdividing an organization, or merging organizations. If propagation of a covered work
results from an entity transaction, each party to that transaction who
receives a copy of the work also receives whatever licenses to the work
the party’s predecessor in interest had or could give under the previous
paragraph, plus a right to possession of the Corresponding Source of
the work from the predecessor in interest, if the predecessor has it or
can get it with reasonable eﬀorts.
You may not impose any further restrictions on the exercise of the
rights granted or aﬃrmed under this License. For example, you may
not impose a license fee, royalty, or other charge for exercise of rights
granted under this License, and you may not initiate litigation (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that any
patent claim is infringed by making, using, selling, oﬀering for sale, or
importing the Program or any portion of it. 11. Patents.
A “contributor” is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this
License of the Program or a work on which the Program is based. The
work thus licensed is called the contributor’s “contributor version”.
A contributor’s “essential patent claims” are all patent claims owned
or controlled by the contributor, whether already acquired or hereafter
acquired, that would be infringed by some manner, permitted by this
License, of making, using, or selling its contributor version, but do
not include claims that would be infringed only as a consequence of
further modiﬁcation of the contributor version. For purposes of this
deﬁnition, “control” includes the right to grant patent sublicenses in a
manner consistent with the requirements of this License.
Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free
patent license under the contributor’s essential patent claims, to make,
use, sell, oﬀer for sale, import and otherwise run, modify and propagate the contents of its contributor version.
In the following three paragraphs, a “patent license” is any express
agreement or commitment, however denominated, not to enforce a
patent (such as an express permission to practice a patent or covenant
not to sue for patent infringement). To “grant” such a patent license
to a party means to make such an agreement or commitment not to
enforce a patent against the party.
If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying on a patent license,
and the Corresponding Source of the work is not available for anyone
to copy, free of charge and under the terms of this License, through
a publicly available network server or other readily accessible means,
then you must either (1) cause the Corresponding Source to be so
available, or (2) arrange to deprive yourself of the beneﬁt of the patent
license for this particular work, or (3) arrange, in a manner consistent
with the requirements of this License, to extend the patent license to
downstream recipients. “Knowingly relying” means you have actual
knowledge that, but for the patent license, your conveying the covered work in a country, or your recipient’s use of the covered work
in a country, would infringe one or more identiﬁable patents in that
country that you have reason to believe are valid.
If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction or arrangement, you convey, or propagate by procuring conveyance of, a covered
work, and grant a patent license to some of the parties receiving the
covered work authorizing them to use, propagate, modify or convey a
speciﬁc copy of the covered work, then the patent license you grant is
automatically extended to all recipients of the covered work and works
based on it.
A patent license is “discriminatory” if it does not include within the
scope of its coverage, prohibits the exercise of, or is conditioned on the
non-exercise of one or more of the rights that are speciﬁcally granted
under this License. You may not convey a covered work if you are
a party to an arrangement with a third party that is in the business
of distributing software, under which you make payment to the third
party based on the extent of your activity of conveying the work, and
under which the third party grants, to any of the parties who would
receive the covered work from you, a discriminatory patent license (a)
in connection with copies of the covered work conveyed by you (or
copies made from those copies), or (b) primarily for and in connection
with speciﬁc products or compilations that contain the covered work,
unless you entered into that arrangement, or that patent license was
granted, prior to 28 March 2007.
Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or limiting any
implied license or other defenses to infringement that may otherwise
be available to you under applicable patent law. 12. No Surrender of
Others’ Freedom.
If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement
or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do
not excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot convey a covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations
under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not convey it at all. For example, if you agree to
terms that obligate you to collect a royalty for further conveying from
those to whom you convey the Program, the only way you could satisfy

both those terms and this License would be to refrain entirely from
conveying the Program. 13. Use with the GNU Aﬀero General Public
License.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have permission to link or combine any covered work with a work licensed under
version 3 of the GNU Aﬀero General Public License into a single combined work, and to convey the resulting work. The terms of this License will continue to apply to the part which is the covered work, but
the special requirements of the GNU Aﬀero General Public License,
section 13, concerning interaction through a network will apply to the
combination as such. 14. Revised Versions of this License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the GNU General Public License from time to time. Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may diﬀer
in detail to address new problems or concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program
speciﬁes that a certain numbered version of the GNU General Public License “or any later version” applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that numbered version or
of any later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If
the Program does not specify a version number of the GNU General
Public License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free
Software Foundation.
If the Program speciﬁes that a proxy can decide which future versions
of the GNU General Public License can be used, that proxy’s public
statement of acceptance of a version permanently authorizes you to
choose that version for the Program.

Later license versions may give you additional or diﬀerent permissions.
However, no additional obligations are imposed on any author or copyright holder as a result of your choosing to follow a later version. 15.
Disclaimer of Warranty.

THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN
OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM
“AS IS” WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK
AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. 16. Limitation of Liability.

IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR
AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER,
OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES AND/OR CONVEYS
THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU
FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF
THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING
BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR
THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER
OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGES. 17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.

If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided above
cannot be given local legal eﬀect according to their terms, reviewing
courts shall apply local law that most closely approximates an absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection with the Program, unless a
warranty or assumption of liability accompanies a copy of the Program
in return for a fee.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS How to Apply These Terms
to Your New Programs

If the program does terminal interaction, make it output a short notice
like this when it starts in an interactive mode:

If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these
terms.

<program> Copyright (C) <year> <name of author> This program
comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type ‘show
w’. This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it under
certain conditions; type ‘show c’ for details.

To do so, attach the following notices to the program. It is safest to
attach them to the start of each source ﬁle to most eﬀectively state the
exclusion of warranty; and each ﬁle should have at least the “copyright”
line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.
<one line to give the program’s name and a brief idea of what it does.>
Copyright (C) <year> <name of author>
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty
of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper
mail.

The hypothetical commands ‘show w’ and ‘show c’ should show the
appropriate parts of the General Public License. Of course, your program’s commands might be diﬀerent; for a GUI interface, you would
use an “about box”.
You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or
school, if any, to sign a “copyright disclaimer” for the program, if necessary. For more information on this, and how to apply and follow the
GNU GPL, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
The GNU General Public License does not permit incorporating your
program into proprietary programs. If your program is a subroutine
library, you may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary
applications with the library. If this is what you want to do, use the
GNU Lesser General Public License instead of this License. But ﬁrst,
please read <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/why-not-lgpl.html>.

48.2 GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.3, 3 November 2008
Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation,
Inc. <http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed. 0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
functional and useful document ”free” in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the eﬀective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or
without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to
get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modiﬁcations made by others.
This License is a kind of ”copyleft”, which means that derivative works
of the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license
designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does. But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book. We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.
1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium,
that contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can
be distributed under the terms of this License. Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that work
under the conditions stated herein. The ”Document”, below, refers to
any such manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and
is addressed as ”you”. You accept the license if you copy, modify or
distribute the work in a way requiring permission under copyright law.
A ”Modiﬁed Version” of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modiﬁcations and/or translated into another language.
A ”Secondary Section” is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of
the publishers or authors of the Document to the Document’s overall
subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall
directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part
a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter of historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal, commercial,
philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.
The ”Invariant Sections” are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that
says that the Document is released under this License. If a section does
not ﬁt the above deﬁnition of Secondary then it is not allowed to be
designated as Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant
Sections. If the Document does not identify any Invariant Sections
then there are none.
The ”Cover Texts” are certain short passages of text that are listed, as
Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License. A Front-Cover Text may
be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.
A ”Transparent” copy of the Document means a machine-readable
copy, represented in a format whose speciﬁcation is available to the
general public, that is suitable for revising the document straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of pixels)
generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing
editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic
translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to text formatters.
A copy made in an otherwise Transparent ﬁle format whose markup,
or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent modiﬁcation by readers is not Transparent. An image format
is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy
that is not ”Transparent” is called ”Opaque”.
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standardconforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human
modiﬁcation. Examples of transparent image formats include PNG,
XCF and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can
be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or
XML for which the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally
available, and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
The ”Title Page” means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus
such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this
License requires to appear in the title page. For works in formats
which do not have any title page as such, ”Title Page” means the text
near the most prominent appearance of the work’s title, preceding the
beginning of the body of the text.
The ”publisher” means any person or entity that distributes copies of
the Document to the public.
A section ”Entitled XYZ” means a named subunit of the Document
whose title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses

following text that translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ
stands for a speciﬁc section name mentioned below, such as ”Acknowledgements”, ”Dedications”, ”Endorsements”, or ”History”.) To ”Preserve
the Title” of such a section when you modify the Document means that
it remains a section ”Entitled XYZ” according to this deﬁnition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice
which states that this License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in this
License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has no
eﬀect on the meaning of this License. 2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no
other conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies. 3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have
printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the
Document’s license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts:
Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the
back cover. Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as
the publisher of these copies. The front cover must present the full title
with all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You may add
other material on the covers in addition. Copying with changes limited
to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and
satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other
respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to ﬁt legibly,
you should put the ﬁrst ones listed (as many as ﬁt reasonably) on the
actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque
copy a computer-network location from which the general networkusing public has access to download using public-standard network
protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added
material. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity,
to ensure that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the
stated location until at least one year after the last time you distribute
an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that
edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to
give them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the
Document. 4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modiﬁed Version of the Document under the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modiﬁed Version under precisely this License, with the Modiﬁed
Version ﬁlling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modiﬁcation of the Modiﬁed Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it. In addition, you must do these things in the Modiﬁed Version:
* A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
(which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section of
the Document). You may use the same title as a previous version if
the original publisher of that version gives permission. * B. List on
the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible
for authorship of the modiﬁcations in the Modiﬁed Version, together
with at least ﬁve of the principal authors of the Document (all of its
principal authors, if it has fewer than ﬁve), unless they release you
from this requirement. * C. State on the Title page the name of the
publisher of the Modiﬁed Version, as the publisher. * D. Preserve
all the copyright notices of the Document. * E. Add an appropriate
copyright notice for your modiﬁcations adjacent to the other copyright
notices. * F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license
notice giving the public permission to use the Modiﬁed Version under
the terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
* G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
and required Cover Texts given in the Document’s license notice. *
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License. * I. Preserve the section
Entitled ”History”, Preserve its Title, and add to it an item stating at
least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the Modiﬁed Version as given on the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled ”History”
in the Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add an item
describing the Modiﬁed Version as stated in the previous sentence. *
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the
network locations given in the Document for previous versions it was
based on. These may be placed in the ”History” section. You may omit
a network location for a work that was published at least four years
before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version it
refers to gives permission. * K. For any section Entitled ”Acknowledgements” or ”Dedications”, Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve
in the section all the substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein. * L. Preserve all
the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text and

in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered
part of the section titles. * M. Delete any section Entitled ”Endorsements”. Such a section may not be included in the Modiﬁed Version.
* N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled ”Endorsements”
or to conﬂict in title with any Invariant Section. * O. Preserve any
Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modiﬁed Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied
from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all of
these sections as invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of
Invariant Sections in the Modiﬁed Version’s license notice. These titles
must be distinct from any other section titles.
You may add a section Entitled ”Endorsements”, provided it contains nothing but endorsements of your Modiﬁed Version by various
parties—for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative deﬁnition of a
standard.
You may add a passage of up to ﬁve words as a Front-Cover Text,
and a passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end
of the list of Cover Texts in the Modiﬁed Version. Only one passage
of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by
(or through arrangements made by) any one entity. If the Document
already includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by
you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on
behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old one,
on explicit permission from the previous publisher that added the old
one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modiﬁed Version. 5. COMBINING
DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under
this License, under the terms deﬁned in section 4 above for modiﬁed
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodiﬁed, and list
them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its license
notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy. If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name
but diﬀerent contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant
Sections in the license notice of the combined work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled ”History”
in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled ”History”; likewise combine any sections Entitled ”Acknowledgements”, and
any sections Entitled ”Dedications”. You must delete all sections Entitled ”Endorsements”. 6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released under this License, and replace the individual copies
of this License in the various documents with a single copy that is
included in the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this
License for verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other
respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy
of this License into the extracted document, and follow this License
in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document. 7.
AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, is called an ”aggregate” if the copyright resulting
from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights of the compilation’s users beyond what the individual works permit. When the
Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not apply to
the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves derivative
works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies
of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of the
entire aggregate, the Document’s Cover Texts may be placed on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the electronic
equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise
they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole aggregate.
8. TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modiﬁcation, so you may distribute
translations of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing
Invariant Sections with translations requires special permission from
their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all
Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include a translation of this License, and all the
license notices in the Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include the original English version of this License
and the original versions of those notices and disclaimers. In case of a
disagreement between the translation and the original version of this
License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled ”Acknowledgements”, ”Dedications”, or ”History”, the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title

(section 1) will typically require changing the actual title. 9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document
except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute it is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license
from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and ﬁnally terminates
your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means prior to 60 days
after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated
permanently if the copyright holder notiﬁes you of the violation by
some reasonable means, this is the ﬁrst time you have received notice
of violation of this License (for any work) from that copyright holder,
and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the
notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the
licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under
this License. If your rights have been terminated and not permanently
reinstated, receipt of a copy of some or all of the same material does
not give you any rights to use it. 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS
LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time. Such
new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but
may diﬀer in detail to address new problems or concerns. See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document speciﬁes that a particular numbered version of this
License ”or any later version” applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that speciﬁed version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published
(not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document
speciﬁes that a proxy can decide which future versions of this License
can be used, that proxy’s public statement of acceptance of a version
permanently authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.
11. RELICENSING
”Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site” (or ”MMC Site”) means any
World Wide Web server that publishes copyrightable works and also
provides prominent facilities for anybody to edit those works. A public
wiki that anybody can edit is an example of such a server. A ”Massive
Multiauthor Collaboration” (or ”MMC”) contained in the site means
any set of copyrightable works thus published on the MMC site.
”CC-BY-SA” means the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike
3.0 license published by Creative Commons Corporation, a not-forproﬁt corporation with a principal place of business in San Francisco,
California, as well as future copyleft versions of that license published
by that same organization.
”Incorporate” means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or
in part, as part of another Document.
An MMC is ”eligible for relicensing” if it is licensed under this License,
and if all works that were ﬁrst published under this License somewhere
other than this MMC, and subsequently incorporated in whole or in
part into the MMC, (1) had no cover texts or invariant sections, and
(2) were thus incorporated prior to November 1, 2008.
The operator of an MMC Site may republish an MMC contained in
the site under CC-BY-SA on the same site at any time before August
1, 2009, provided the MMC is eligible for relicensing. ADDENDUM:
How to use this License for your documents
To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy
of the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:
Copyright (C) YEAR YOUR NAME. Permission is granted to copy,
distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU
Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections,
no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled ”GNU Free Documentation License”.
If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover
Texts, replace the ”with … Texts.” line with this:
with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being
LIST.
If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other
combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the situation.
If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License, to permit their use in free software.

48.3 GNU Lesser General Public License
GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright © 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <http://fsf.org/>

The “Corresponding Application Code” for a Combined Work means
the object code and/or source code for the Application, including any
data and utility programs needed for reproducing the Combined Work
from the Application, but excluding the System Libraries of the Combined Work. 1. Exception to Section 3 of the GNU GPL.

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.

You may convey a covered work under sections 3 and 4 of this License
without being bound by section 3 of the GNU GPL. 2. Conveying
Modiﬁed Versions.

This version of the GNU Lesser General Public License incorporates
the terms and conditions of version 3 of the GNU General Public License, supplemented by the additional permissions listed below. 0.
Additional Deﬁnitions.

If you modify a copy of the Library, and, in your modiﬁcations, a facility refers to a function or data to be supplied by an Application that
uses the facility (other than as an argument passed when the facility
is invoked), then you may convey a copy of the modiﬁed version:

As used herein, “this License” refers to version 3 of the GNU Lesser
General Public License, and the “GNU GPL” refers to version 3 of the
GNU General Public License.

* a) under this License, provided that you make a good faith eﬀort to
ensure that, in the event an Application does not supply the function
or data, the facility still operates, and performs whatever part of its
purpose remains meaningful, or * b) under the GNU GPL, with none
of the additional permissions of this License applicable to that copy.

“The Library” refers to a covered work governed by this License, other
than an Application or a Combined Work as deﬁned below.

3. Object Code Incorporating Material from Library Header Files.
An “Application” is any work that makes use of an interface provided
by the Library, but which is not otherwise based on the Library. Deﬁning a subclass of a class deﬁned by the Library is deemed a mode of
using an interface provided by the Library.
A “Combined Work” is a work produced by combining or linking an
Application with the Library. The particular version of the Library
with which the Combined Work was made is also called the “Linked
Version”.
The “Minimal Corresponding Source” for a Combined Work means the
Corresponding Source for the Combined Work, excluding any source
code for portions of the Combined Work that, considered in isolation,
are based on the Application, and not on the Linked Version.

The object code form of an Application may incorporate material from
a header ﬁle that is part of the Library. You may convey such object
code under terms of your choice, provided that, if the incorporated material is not limited to numerical parameters, data structure layouts
and accessors, or small macros, inline functions and templates (ten or
fewer lines in length), you do both of the following:
* a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the object code that the
Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are covered by
this License. * b) Accompany the object code with a copy of the GNU
GPL and this license document.
4. Combined Works.

You may convey a Combined Work under terms of your choice that,
taken together, eﬀectively do not restrict modiﬁcation of the portions
of the Library contained in the Combined Work and reverse engineering for debugging such modiﬁcations, if you also do each of the following:

You may place library facilities that are a work based on the Library
side by side in a single library together with other library facilities that
are not Applications and are not covered by this License, and convey
such a combined library under terms of your choice, if you do both of
the following:

* a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the Combined Work
that the Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are
covered by this License. * b) Accompany the Combined Work with a
copy of the GNU GPL and this license document. * c) For a Combined Work that displays copyright notices during execution, include
the copyright notice for the Library among these notices, as well as a
reference directing the user to the copies of the GNU GPL and this
license document. * d) Do one of the following: o 0) Convey the
Minimal Corresponding Source under the terms of this License, and
the Corresponding Application Code in a form suitable for, and under
terms that permit, the user to recombine or relink the Application
with a modiﬁed version of the Linked Version to produce a modiﬁed
Combined Work, in the manner speciﬁed by section 6 of the GNU
GPL for conveying Corresponding Source. o 1) Use a suitable shared
library mechanism for linking with the Library. A suitable mechanism
is one that (a) uses at run time a copy of the Library already present
on the user’s computer system, and (b) will operate properly with a
modiﬁed version of the Library that is interface-compatible with the
Linked Version. * e) Provide Installation Information, but only if you
would otherwise be required to provide such information under section
6 of the GNU GPL, and only to the extent that such information is
necessary to install and execute a modiﬁed version of the Combined
Work produced by recombining or relinking the Application with a
modiﬁed version of the Linked Version. (If you use option 4d0, the
Installation Information must accompany the Minimal Corresponding
Source and Corresponding Application Code. If you use option 4d1,
you must provide the Installation Information in the manner speciﬁed
by section 6 of the GNU GPL for conveying Corresponding Source.)

* a) Accompany the combined library with a copy of the same work
based on the Library, uncombined with any other library facilities,
conveyed under the terms of this License. * b) Give prominent notice with the combined library that part of it is a work based on the
Library, and explaining where to ﬁnd the accompanying uncombined
form of the same work.

5. Combined Libraries.

6. Revised Versions of the GNU Lesser General Public License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the GNU Lesser General Public License from time to time.
Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but
may diﬀer in detail to address new problems or concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Library
as you received it speciﬁes that a certain numbered version of the GNU
Lesser General Public License “or any later version” applies to it, you
have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that
published version or of any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation. If the Library as you received it does not specify a version
number of the GNU Lesser General Public License, you may choose
any version of the GNU Lesser General Public License ever published
by the Free Software Foundation.
If the Library as you received it speciﬁes that a proxy can decide
whether future versions of the GNU Lesser General Public License
shall apply, that proxy’s public statement of acceptance of any version is permanent authorization for you to choose that version for the
Library.

