An alluvial plain is a plain (an essentially flat landform) created by the deposition of sediment over a long period by one or more rivers coming from highland regions, from which alluvial soil forms. A floodplain is part of the process, being the smaller area over which the rivers flood at a particular time. In contrast, the alluvial plain is the larger area representing the region over which the floodplains have shifted over geological time.
As the highlands erode due to weathering and water flow, the sediment from the hills is transported to the lower plain. Various creeks will carry the water further to a river, lake, bay, or ocean. As the sediments are deposited during flood conditions in the floodplain of a creek, the elevation of the floodplain will be raised. As this reduces the channel floodwater capacity, the creek will, over time, seek new, lower paths, forming a meander (a curved path). The leftover higher locations, typically natural levees at the margins of the flood channel, will be eroded by lateral stream erosion, local rainfall, and possibly wind transport if the climate is arid and does not support soil-holding grasses. These processes, over geologic time, will form the plain, a region with little relief (local changes in elevation) yet with a constant but slight slope.
The Glossary of Landform and Geologic Terms, maintained by the United States National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS), defines an "alluvial plain" as "a large assemblage of fluvial landforms (braided streams, terraces, etc.) that form a low gradient, regional ramps along the flanks of mountains and extend great distances from their sources (e.g., High Plains of North America)".  Use of "alluvial plain" as a general, informal term for a broad flood plain or a low-gradient delta is explicitly discouraged.  The NCSS glossary instead suggests "flood plain".
Alluvial plains have similar traits to a river delta; however, the river delta will flow into a larger body of water. Alluvial plains generally don't have this.
Commonly, alluvial plains are fertile as they are continually replenished by new deposits.

Alluvial plains by continent

Africa
Barotse Floodplain in Angola and Zambia
Kafue Flats in Zambia
Okavango Delta in Botswana

Asia
Chianan Plain in Taiwan
Indo-Gangetic Plain in Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan
Mekong Delta in Vietnam
Mesopotamia in Iraq
North China Plain in China
Punjab Plain in India and Pakistan

Europe
Baetic Depression in Andalusia, Spain
Haute vallée de la Sarthe in France
Iskar Valleys in Bulgaria
Lower Danubian Plain, Bulgaria and Romania
Mesaoria in Cyprus
Multiple alluvial sites in Switzerland
Palakaria Valley in Bulgaria
Po Valley in Italy
Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt Delta in the Netherlands
Struma Valley in Bulgaria
Tundzha Valleys in Bulgaria
Upper Thracian Plain in Bulgaria

North America
Laguna de Santa Rosa in the United States
Mississippi Alluvial Plain in the United States
Oxnard Plain in the United States
Santa Clara Valley in San Jose, California, United States
Tempisque River Plain in Costa Rica

Oceania
Canterbury Plains in Canterbury, New Zealand
Cumberland Plain in Greater Western Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
Darling Riverine Plains in South-eastern Australia
Lockyer Valley in South-eastern Queensland, Australia
Southland Plains in Southland, New Zealand
Waikato Plains in Waikato, New Zealand

South America
Gran Chaco in Argentina, Bolivia, and Paraguay
Llanos in Colombia and Venezuela
Llanos de Moxos in Bolivia
Middle Amazon in Brazil
