The International Cartographic Association (ICA) (French: Association Cartographique Internationale, ACI) is an organization formed of national member organizations, to provide a forum for issues and techniques in cartography and geographic information science (GIScience). ICA was founded on June 9, 1959, in Bern, Switzerland. The first General Assembly was held in Paris in 1961. The mission of the International Cartographic Association is to promote the disciplines and professions of cartography and GIScience in an international context. To achieve these aims, the ICA works with national and international governmental and commercial bodies, and with other international scientific societies.

Leadership

Presidents
The first president, Eduard Imhof of Switzerland was heavily involved in founding the association.

Secretaries-General and Treasurers
The Secretary-General and Treasurer is responsible for the administration and the general running of the Association.

Executive committee
On 20 July 2019 member nations elected the new Executive Committee (EC) of the ICA for the 2019–2023 term. New ICA president is Tim Trainor.

Commissions
To coordinate international cartographic work Commissions and Working Groups have been established. These are chaired by experts in a specific field of cartography and comprise members from the international Cartography and GIScience community.

Commission on Art and Cartography
Commission on Atlases
Commission on Cartographic Heritage into the Digital
Commission on Cartography and Children
Commission on Cartography and Sustainable Development
Commission on Cartography in Early Warning and Crisis Management
Commission on Cognitive Issues in Geographic Information Visualization
Commission on Digital Transformation of National Mapping Agencies
Commission on Education and Training
Commission on Ethics in Cartography
Commission on GeoAI
Commission on Geospatial Analysis and Modeling
Commission on Geospatial Data Analytics
Commission on Geospatial Semantics and Ontology
Commission on Geovisualization
Commission on High-Definition Maps
Commission on Integrated Geospatial Information for Cartography
Commission on Location Based Services
Commission on Map Design
Commission on Map Projections
Commission on Maps and the Internet
Commission on Marine Cartography
Commission on Mountain Cartography
Commission on Multi-scale Cartography
Commission on Topographic Mapping
Commission on Toponymy (ICA-IGU joint commission)
Commission on Ubiquitous Mapping
Commission on User Experience

Working groups
Working Group on the Cartographic Body of Knowledge
Working Group on Inclusive Cartography
Working Group Next Generation Cartographers
Working Group on Participatory Mapping
Working Group on Peace and Conflict Cartography
Working Group on Standardisation in Cartography

Members
ICA allows two types of memberships:

Affiliate members are organisations, institutions or companies wishing to support the mission and activities of ICA.
National members are national organizations dealing with cartography or geoinformation, such as national mapping agencies.

Conferences
International Cartographic Conferences (ICC) take place every second year in one of the member countries. At every second conference (every fourth year) it hosts the General Assembly of the ICA.

ICC Conferences

Awards

Carl Mannerfelt Gold Medal

The Carl Mannerfelt Gold Medal honours cartographers of outstanding merit who have made significant contributions of an original nature to the field of cartography. It is awarded only on rare occasions. The award is named after the Swedish cartographer, Carl Mannerfelt, who in 1981 won the prize named after him.

Recipients 

ICA Honorary Fellowship
The ICA Honorary Fellowship is for cartographers of international reputation who have made special contribution to the ICA. It includes a bronze medal.

ICA Map Awards at the International Map Exhibition
At the biennial International Map Exhibitions at the ICC an international jury selects the best entries.

Barbara Petchenik International Children Map Design Competition
This competition is organized every two years at the ICC. In a national round in all participating ICA member countries, the national winners are selected, which are exhibited during the International Cartographic Conference, where the international winners are selected.

Publications

ICA offers a number of publications.
Its official journal is the International Journal of Cartography (print ISSN 2372-9333; online ISSN 2372-9341),
published by Taylor & Francis on behalf of ICA.
It also has three affiliated journals:

The Cartographic Journal
Cartographica
Cartography and Geographic Information Science
