The Tirari–Sturt stony desert is a deserts and xeric shrublands ecoregion in central Australia.

Location and description
The Tirari–Sturt stony desert ecoregion contains the gibber plains (desert pavement) and red sands of the large Sturt Stony Desert, the Tirari Desert to its southwest and the Flinders and Gawler Ranges to the south. The Tirari has more sand dunes than the Sturt Stony Desert and has also been the site of some important fossil findings. Towns of the ecoregion include the opal mining centre of Coober Pedy, famous for its underground dwellings. The climate is very hot with summer temperatures reaching 50 °C.
The region consists of the Stony Plains, Gawler, Flinders Lofty Block and the Broken Hill Complex bioregions of the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia (IBRA).

Flora and fauna
As well as stony plain and sands there are areas of chenopod, mallee and mulga wooded scrubland. The region is home to a variety of wildlife that has adapted to the hot dry conditions including the wedge-tailed eagles, yellow-footed rock wallaby, red kangaroos, and western grey kangaroos of the Flinders Ranges.
The desert proper is uninhabitable and the environment there remains undamaged, while the greener fringe are used for sheep grazing.

Protected areas
10.34% of the ecoregion is in protected areas. Protected areas include:

Bimbowrie Conservation Park
Black Rock Conservation Park
Bon Bon Station Conservation Reserve
Boolcoomatta Conservation Reserve
Buckaringa Private Nature Reserve
Bunkers Conservation Reserve
Caroona Creek Conservation Park
Coongie Lakes Ramsar Site, Wetland of International Importance
Danggali Wilderness Protection Area
Ediacara Conservation Park
Elliot Price Conservation Park
Gawler Ranges National Park
Hiltaba Nature Reserve
Ikara-Flinders Ranges National Park
Ironstone Hill Conservation Park
Kanku-Breakaways Conservation Park
Kati Thanda-Lake Eyre National Park
Kinchega National Park
Lake Frome Regional Reserve
Lake Gairdner National Park
Lake Gilles Conservation Park
Lake Torrens National Park
Mount Brown Conservation Park
Mount Willoughby Indigenous Protected Area
Munyaroo Conservation Park
Mutawintji Nature Reserve
Mutawintji National Park
Nantawarrina Indigenous Protected Area
Pandappa Conservation Park
Pinkawillinie Conservation Park
Pualco Range Conservation Park
Red Banks Conservation Park
Simpson Desert Regional Reserve
Strzelecki Regional Reserve
The Dutchmans Stern Conservation Park
Upper Spencer Gulf Marine Park
Vulkathunha-Gammon Ranges National Park
Wabma Kadarbu Mound Springs Conservation Park
Whyalla Conservation Park
Winninowie Conservation Park
Witchelina Nature Reserve
Witjira National Park
Yalpara Conservation Park
Yappala Indigenous Protected Area
Yellabinna Regional Reserve
Yellabinna Wilderness Protection Area
Yumbarra Conservation Park
