The Himalayan Arc: Journeys East of South-east is an anthology of fiction and nonfiction edited by Namita Gokhale, with contributions by authors from the region Gokhale has described as "the bend of the Himalayas, the East of South-east, including Nepal, Bhutan, north-east India, and Myanmar."

Background
This book, with more than thirty authors contributing to it, is an attempt to depict the sense of shared existence and cultural connectivity between the people residing in the Himalayan region. Along with photos, fables, and folk stories, it features articles on topics such as strategy and diplomacy, espionage, and the deep state.

List of contributors
Janice Pariat
Salil Tripathi
Ma Thida
Indra Bahadur Rai
Prajwal Parajuly
David Malone (independent filmmaker)
Chetan Raj Shrestha
Kanak Mani Dixit
Sujeev Shakya
Pushpesh Pant
John Elliott (historian)
Amish Raj Mulmi
Thomas Bell
Sushma Joshi
Sanjoy Hazarika
Sudhindra Sharma
Tsering Tashi
Abhay K.
Manoj Joshi (journalist)
Catherine Anderson
Andrew Duff
Binodini
Jacqueline Zote
Aruni Kashyap
Sameer Tanti
Nitoo Das
Lutfa Hanum Selima Begum
Uddipana Goswami
Robin Ngangom
Akhu Chingangbam
Indira Goswami
Andrew Selth
Tulsi Badrinath
Meghna Pant
Mamang Dai
Desmond Kharmawphlang

Reception
In his review for The Hindu, Bangladeshi journalist Abdus Salam writes, "The volume ticks all boxes, covering most of the region, opening with Nepal and going all the way to Myanmar. There’s even poetry and colonial-era photographs thrown in. But in the absence of an overarching theme other than geography, the information is discrete and unconnected, an assemblage of vignettes that doesn’t add up to a big picture."
Prannay Pathak of the Hindustan Times writes, "The book is an unprecedented attempt to shed a geopolitical light on a stretch of land, a region that has so far been imagined as having a curiously singular identity, which ceases to exist beyond political borders. However, experiences from the arc transcend any sort of boundaries, and change of culture, practices, beliefs, and language is fluid."
Writing for Outlook Traveller, Vivek Mukherji in his review suggests that the book, "Despite the vastly different subcultures tucked within the folds of the Himalayan ranges, the book is a testament to the interconnectedness of its many warm communities." In a review published in The News Lens, Omair Ahmad writes, "These histories have largely been forgotten in favor of the lines drawn on the map by the British Empire and its successors, but they have re-emerged, and have to be understood, if we are to understand the complex political geography of the region."
