1 Behavioralist
1.1 Introduction
Behaviorism, as a learning theory, can be traced back to Aristotle, whose essay “Memory”
focused on associations being made between events such as lightning and thunder. Other
philosophers that followed Aristotle’s thoughts are Hobbes (1650), Hume (1740), Brown
(1820), Bain (1855) and Ebbinghause (1885) (Black, 1995). Ivan Pavlov, John B. Watson,
Edward Thorndike and B.F. Skinner later developed the theory in more detail. Watson is
the theorist credited with coining the term "behaviorism"1 .
A key difference in these various forms of associationism is that until Skinner, they were
considered to be associations of mental or cognitive events. Skinner departed from this
mental associationism and claimed that what associates two things is the environment itself,
not the mind of the spectator2 . This departure has been noted as being part of a substantial
number of changes in what was, until then, called Behaviorism - and which Skinner called
Radical Behaviorism - that it may be a historical accident that it was called Behaviorism at
all 3 .

1.2 Behaviorism as a learning theory
The school of adult learning theory that adopted these principles has become known as the
school of Behaviorism, which saw learning as a complex process of responses to several kinds
of distinct stimuli. Skinner always referred to it as a three-term contingency comprised
of a discriminative stimuli, or Sd , a response, or R, and a reinforcing stimulus, or Srein .
Conditions of deprivation and satiation, and other changes in the environment, have come
to be generally acknowledged p[' as a kind of fourth term, and are denoted as Motivating
Operations (MO) generally, Abolishing Operations (AO), or Establishing Operations (EO)
depending on whether they make a reinforcer less effective (abolishing), more effective
(establishing) and so on. Jack Michael has been instrumental in refining and exploring these
elements 4
A reinforcement is defined as a stimulus that strengthen the response, which is to say that
it makes it more probable, or alters its frequency. Spillane (2002) states, “the behaviorist
perspective, associated with B. F. Skinner, holds that the mind at work cannot be observed,
1
2
3
4

Watson, John Broadus, Psychology as the Behaviorist Views It, 1913 http://psychclassics.yorku.
ca/Watson/views.htm ˆ{http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/} http://’’
Skinner, B.F. About Behaviorism p.43
Chiesa, Mecca. (1994) Radical Behaviorism: the Philosophy and the Science.
for example Michael, J. Motivating operations. In J. O. Cooper, T. E. Heron, & W. L. Heward, Applied
behavior analysis (2nd ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall/Merrill.

3

Behavioralist
tested, or understood; thus, behaviorists are concerned with actions (behavior) as the sites
of knowing, teaching, and learning” (p. 380).

1.3 The Technology of Teaching
There have been several major Behaviorist innovations for improving learning. A few were
B.F. Skinner's Programmed Instruction, Fred Keller's Personalized System of Instruction
(PSI)5 , Ogden Lindsley's Precision Teaching6 , and others.
B.F. Skinner also wrote a book on major problems in popular teaching theories called
The Technology of Teaching which attacked educational problems which were then current.
The descriptions of educational problems, not surprisingly, seems like it was written today:
truancy, vandalism, violence in the classroom and more.
One of the keys to effective teaching is discovering the best consequence to shape the behavior.
Consequences can be positive or negative – rewarding or punishing. Consequences transpire
after the desired behavior occurs and can involve either positive or negative reinforcement.
Positive reinforcement involves a stimulus that increases the likelihood of a particular
response, such as a child receiving a gold star for doing a chore. Negative reinforcement
also increases the probability of the desired response and involves removing an undesirable
stimulus upon completion of the desired response. An example might be entering the
correct password to turn off a loud alarm. Punishment is often confused with negative
reinforcement; however, punishment is used to erase undesirable behaviors by presenting a
distressing stimulus when the behavior occurs. Paying a fine for bouncing a check is a form
of punishment. “Extinction” occurs when there is no consequence at all – for example if you
knock at the door and no one answers, pretty soon you simply stop knocking (Zemke, 2002).

1.4 Verbal Behavior
The seminal work of Pavlov demonstrated that the application of neutral stimuli could be
used to elicit a response from animals in the same way that an unconditioned stimulus could
7 From these initial studies other psychologists such as John Watson demonstrated that these
principles could be applied to humans (Cheetham & Chivers, 2001)8 . Skinner invented the
term operant to describe his attempt to better account for volitional behavior we usually call
free 9 . In Skinner's original work it was confined solely to animals, particularly the white rat.
However, it wasn't long before operant behavior was observed in humans. Skinner's attempt
to account for the operant behavior of humans, including complex language functions,
resulted in his seminal work, Verbal Behavior (1951) which accounted for ways in which


The Illusion of Free Will
human operants differed for non-human ones. This was extended with the conception of
rule governed behavior 10

1.5 The Illusion of Free Will
One of the assumptions of many behaviorists is that free will is illusory, and that all behavior
is determined by a combination of forces. These forces comprise genetic factors as well
as the environment either through association or reinforcement. The "illusion of free will"
concept is deeply embroiled in the nature vs. nurture controversy. Asking the question,
"Are individuals shaped by genetics or by existentialism?" is the essence of this debate.
Behaviorists believe that the environment is the primary influence that determines who
individuals will be and the behavior they will choose. Hence, the reason why free will is
only an illusion or imaginary deduction.
Skinner argued that the assumption of lawfulness in human behavior was an unprovable
prerequisite to the scientific investigation of human behavior11 . Without the assumption of
lawfulness, that is the lack of freewill, such a science could not exist.
Skinner has continued this argument by noting in his controversial book Beyond Freedom
and Dignity that the historically beneficial forces that have arisen to defend Freedom and
Dignity may be violently opposing the scientific conception of man.

1.6 Criticism
This theory has latterly been criticized as overly simplistic. Nevertheless, its influence can
be seen in educators’ insistence that feedback is critical to learning. The stimulus-response
method is used frequently in adult learning situations in which the students must learn
a time sensitive response to a stimulus. Aircraft emergency procedures, for example, are
divided into two parts. The first, the time sensitive portion, must be immediately performed
by rote memory upon recognition of a stimulus – a warning light, horn, buzzer, bell, or the
like. These procedures are taught and reinforced with rote drills and successfully passing
the tests is the reinforcement. The second portion of the procedure, which may be viewed
as diagnostic action is performed with mandatory reference to checklists and other reference
material and depends on what may be viewed as higher level learning and understanding of
aircraft systems and performance characteristics.
Behaviorist Theory maintains a focus on the change in observable behaviors as the manifestations of learning. The theory emphasizes changes in behaviors due to the influence
and control of the external environment, rather than the internal thought process of the
subject (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999). Simply put, people will learn desired behaviors due
to stimuli from their external environment that recognize and reinforce the behavior in a
10

11

for example Galizio, M. (1979)Contingency-shaped and rule-governed behavior: instructional control of human loss avoidance, Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 31, 53–70.
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1332789 ˆ{http://en.wikibooks.
org/wiki/} http://
see Skinner, B.F. About Behaviorism and other sources

5

Behavioralist
positive manner. Undesired behaviors can be controlled or eliminated by an absence of
attention to or recognition of such.
Behaviorism is comprised of several individual theories that have a common theme functioning
within them. This common theme is found in the ways the theorists define what learning is,
and how it is accomplished. The common assumptions of these theorists are threefold, as
explained by Merriam and Caffarella (1999). The first common assumption is the emphasis
on observable behavior rather than internal thought processes create learning. Second,
ultimately it is the environment that creates learning and it determines what is learned,
not the individual learner. Lastly it is the ability to understand the overall process, and
the ability to repeat or reinforce that process that is a common thread (Merriam and
Caffarella, 1999). This theory is most commonly seen in adult learning when organizations
take repeatable training steps and systematize them into manageable tasks.
The hypothesis behind behavioralist learning theories is that all learning occurs when behavior
is influenced and changed by external factors (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999). Behavioralism
disregards any notion that there may be an internal component to man’s learning. Grippin
and Peters (1984) emphasize that “contiguity. . . and reinforcement are central to explaining
the learning process” (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999, p. 251) in regard to an individual’s
subjugation to external stimulus as a determinant of response (i.e., behavior). Contiguity
is understood as the timing of events that is necessary to bring about behavioral change,
while reinforcement refers to the probability that repeated positive or negative events will
produce an anticipated change in behavior (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999).
Behavioral theory is a key component of animal training and skill training in humans.
Teaching animals to sit for a kibble is very similar to clapping and hugging your child
for their first steps or bike ride. Slot machines are based on intermittent reinforcement,
which in turn leads gamblers to put more quarters in the machine to be reinforced by
the ching ching of winning. As students, we are reinforced by the 100 points or A we
receive on the test or paper, or by the removal of the F on the grade card. Source
http://web.cocc.edu/cbuell/theories/behaviorism.htm
Behavioral theories have also been studied and applied in organizational leadership. Dating
back to the 1940's, studies were conducted at Ohio State University (OSU) and the University
of Michigan (UM) (Robbins 1998). What the researchers found in the OSU and UM studies
can be classified into two categories: relationships and results. In the OSU studies, researchers
compiled behaviors into two dimensions: initiating structure (results) and consideration
(relationships). UM researchers compiled their leader behavior under two similar dimensions:
employee oriented and production oriented. From this research, Blake and Mouton developed
the Managerial Grid, later to be called the Leadership Grid. This grid assists leaders in
assessing possible outcomes to their behavior within an organization. Robbins states, "The
grid does not show results produced but, rather, the dominating factors in a leader's
thinking in regard to getting results" (p. 351). Behavioral leading and learning is based
on organizational and cultural conditioning. This can be observed in the tough-handed,
"hatchet wielding" approach of Jack Welch and in the benevolent "lend-a-hand" approach of
Herb Kelleher. Behavioral theories within leadership have had "modest success in identifying
consistent relationships between patterns of leadership behavior and group performance.
What seems to be missing is consideration of the situational factors that influence success or
failure" (p. 353).

6

Simplistic or fundamental?

1.7 Simplistic or fundamental?
Some might view this theory as being a very elementary learning process. It suggests, by
and large, that any learning is result oriented, and, therefore, learned by repetitive actions
based on punishments or rewards. Merriam and Caffarella (1999) refer to Thorndike's work
which used animals in controlled experiments to determine learning behavior based on the
stimulus presented. This process, while presenting a possible outcome for comparison, is
unrealistic when compared to the intelligence capabilities of humans. It could be argued that
this theory tends to diminish the possibilities in human learning. In some circumstances,
however, this method of learning is necessary; particularly when dealing with individuals
with lower reasoning abilities or lower intelligence.
Pattison (1999) suggested that American adult education’s roots in liberal arts education
and then progressive education quoting (Elias & Merriam, 1995, p. 205). This progressive
education focused upon the broad populace, not just social elites which liberal education
intended to do according to Pattison. This progressive education began taking hold in the
1920’s in public education settings. Into this social setting Behaviorism came. Pattison
suggest that early behaviorists like John Watson focused on job skills and behavior adaptation
that would “secure the survival of humans, societies, and individuals.” Behaviorism coupled
with progressive education would help “control human behavior and viewed education as a
tool for bringing about societal change” (p. 6).
Behaviorist theory presents learning in short manageable blocks that build on previously
learned behaviors. Kearsley (1994) identified three fundamental principles common in
behaviorist learning:
1. Positive reinforcement of the desired behavior will most likely prompt the same
behavior.
2. Learning should be presented in small manageable blocks.
3. Stimulus generalization of learning can produce secondary conditioning.
The goal of this learning method is to transform the learner’s behavior to a “desired”
behavior. The learner is rewarded often for exhibiting the desired behavior when they
accomplish a learning block. This method is heavily used in the federal government to
quickly train employees on the latest policies and procedures (i.e. government credit card
use, anti-terrorism, and sexual harassment). In addition, this method is ideal for short
lessons (no more than 20 minutes) which can be accomplished over the internet from the
employee's desktop computer. Within the 20 minute timeframe, the employee will normally
retain key points of the lesson. However, when the lesson goes beyond the 20 minute window,
there is a potential for the employee to lose focus and hurry through it in order to fulfill
the requirement and get back to work. As a result, the employee retains very little and the
organization has very little success in achieving the desired behavior.
While it is true behaviorist theories can be simplistic in their concept, their application
to the human has allowed for much to be discovered about learning, memory and even
neuroscience. Since the late 1800s, psychologists using behavioral principles have established
hundreds of tests to identify both how learning and memory occur in varying complexities
of brain structures. Across many species, for example, it has been shown that when the
reinforcing agent is "painless" then learning occurs in the cerebellum. However if there is an

7

Behavioralist
emotional connection (particularly negative such as fear) to the reinforcer then learning and
memory occur in the amygdala (Kolb & Whishaw, 2005)
Training of individuals centers on the concept that all learning is the result of the environment
acting upon behaviors. The environment of an individual reinforces behaviors either positively
or negatively and all of learning takes place through environmental influences. Adult learning
can be seen strictly through this focus, but a more centrist approach is neobehaviorism.
Neobehaviorism suggests that not only does the environment reinforce behavior, but there
is an interaction between the individual and the environment. This is an important concept
as it relates to adult learning because of the relative importance of choices to motivation in
the learning process (Ross, 2002).
While Behaviorist Theory was founded in the early decades of the twentieth century, there
still exist many examples of support for the theory. It is not uncommon for organizations to articulate the desired behaviors they expect will lead to positive business results.
Organizations then reinforce those behaviors through performance management and by
adjusting the environment to reward or recognize the desired behaviors. For example, many
companies measure employee performance on two dimensions: business results and desired
behaviors. As well, organizations encourage, through recognition, such positive behaviors
as perfect attendance, employee suggestions for improvements, raising quality issues that
would adversely impact a customer, and good safety behaviors.
Various approaches to promote behavioralist theory in Organizational Learning are many
times predicated on the belief that organizational members prefer, if not altogether require
specific standard operational procedures (SOP). In other words, creative problem solving
does not come naturally with most group members. Following such rationale, Foil and Lyle
(1985) note that this theory is counter to cognitive reasoning which would look at what is
happening environmentally and determine whether SOP is the most appropriate response to
each various event.

1.8 Case studies & workplace examples
1.8.1 Attendance point system
One example of behavioral learning in the workplace is through an attendance point system.
Often times, this type of system offers both positive and negative reinforcement. For example,
most companies using a point system have a written policy stating that employees may
accrue a maximum amount of points during a 12-month revolving period. An employee
is then given a partial point, or more, towards an accrual of the maximum allowable any
time there is an infraction of the policy – especially an attendance infraction. The negative
reinforcement is the notification of accrued points and disciplinary action taken per level of
point accrual – sometimes culminating in termination of the employee. Positive reinforcement
can occur when there is periodic recognition of employees with “perfect” attendance or zero
points. There is one possible fallacy in the system, however. It occurs when an employee
appears to be no longer controlled by the point system, but rather controls the system by
knowing just how many points can be accrued without soliciting discipline. It is in this last
scenario that one understands why most theorists have come to believe that learning is not

8

References
solely comprised of external influence but that it also includes an internal component as
well.

1.8.2 Continental Airlines
Continental Airlines applied this behavioral learning approach in a very successful effort to
reduce absenteeism and increase performance during the turnaround engineered by Gordon
Bethune. Taking over after the disastrous reign of Frank Lorenzo when employee morale
and commitment declined to the point that Continental employees would frequently remove
the company logos from their uniforms, Bethune realized that rewarding employees for what
was really important would drive important behavioral changes. Bethune realized that what
was important was rebuilding passenger confidence and preference by providing service
that met customer needs. To this end, the company implemented quarterly bonuses for all
employees based on achieving targeted levels of performance in the FAA quarterly ratings
of airlines based on lost baggage claims, on time departures, and customer complaints. In
addition, employees with perfect attendance each quarter were entered into drawings for
Ford Explorers. Both programs resulted in marked changes in behavior and contributed to
the turnaround from the edge of bankruptcy. (Bethune and Thuler, 1998)

1.8.3 Time clock
Another example that is elementary yet worth mentioning is The Salvation Army, Canton
Corps' use of a time clock. The initial purpose of the clock in that environment was uncertain.
We found that most people who use the time clock were not using it as intended. Many did
not remember to clock in or out, or they would not use the clock at all. Not until pressure
was exerted on each employee by ruling that they would not get paid if their cards were not
adequately punched, did employees begin to use the time clock appropriately. In a few short
weeks of reminders and a few short paychecks, the time clock was being used properly.

1.9 References

9

2 Constructivist
2.1 Introduction
Constructivism is a learning theory that attempts to explain how learners learn by constructing understanding for themselves. This section will explore the constructivist learning theory
by defining constructivism, providing varying views of constructivism, and illustrating how
constructivism relates to independent learning and higher education.
Constructivism really got its start in the late 1980s. But many people did not know how to
label what they were doing.
In the 1990s, constructivist books abounded. Many people became interested in it.
The principles of Constructivism are broadly adopted in many areas of education today.
The notions of authentic activities, social negotiation, juxtaposition of instructional content,
nurturance of reflexivity, and student-centered instruction inspired many instructors to
examine and think about the importance of interactions between teachers and students,
students and students, and students and learning materials as well. Therefore, both
instructors and students may have opportunities to enhance the effectiveness of their
teaching and learning.
Constructivism gives teachers another perspective to rethink how students learn and to focus
on process and provide ways of documenting change and transformation. It also reminds
teachers to look for different ways to engage individual student, develop rich environments
for exploration, prepare coherent problem sets and challenges that focus the model building
effort, elicit and communicate student perceptions and interpretations(Abdal-Haqq, 1998).
Principles of Constructivism
1. Constructivist learning environments provide multiple representations of reality. These
representations represent that complexity of the real world.
2. Knowledge construction is emphasized over knowledge reproduction. Authentic tasks
are emphasized in meaningful context.
3. Real world settings or case-based learning is provided. Thoughtful reflection on
experience is encouraged.
4. Enable context- and content- dependent knowledge construction. Supports collaboration and social negotiation among learners.
5. Discovery learning Collaborative activity
6. Integration and activation of prior knowledge Opportunities for hands-on activities
(Abdal-Haqq, I. 1998; Jonassen, 1994) [This is mostly straight out of Educational Technology
Journal 1994 vol.34(4) pp.34-37 - Perhaps Abdal-Haqq reprinted the list? Regardless
Jonassen should be listed - and this is definitely Copyrighted work].

11

Constructivist

2.2 Constructivism defined
Constructivism is a synthesis of multiple theories diffused into one form. It is the assimilation
of both behaviorialist and cognitive ideals. The “constructivist stance maintains that learning
is a process of constructing meaning; it is how people make sense of their experience” (Merriam
and Caffarella, 1999, p. 260). This is a combination effect of using a person’s cognitive
abilities and insight to understand their environment. This coincides especially well with
current adult learning theory. This concept is easily translated into a self-directed learning
style, where the individual has the ability to take in all the information and the environment
of a problem and learn. Constructivism reflects the organismic world view (Goldhaber,
2000).Compared with behaviorism which is originated from the mechanistic world view,
constructivism concerns how change occurs in development. For behaviorists, change comes
about when an external force acts upon an object that is inherently at rest. For organismic
theorists, behavioral change is inherent in the living organism itself rather than extremely
driven.
Contrary to criticisms by some (conservative/traditional) educators, constructivism does
not dismiss the active role of the teacher or the value of expert knowledge. Constructivism
modifies that role, so that teachers help students to construct knowledge, rather than to
reproduce a series of facts. Constructivism is also often misconstrued as a learning theory
that compels students to "reinvent the wheel." In fact, constructivism taps into and triggers
the student's innate curiosity about the world and how things work. And then, students
create organizing principles that they can take with them to other learning settings.

2.3 View points
Although varying constructivist theories exist, there is agreement between the theories
“that learning is a process of constructing meaning; it is how people make sense of their
experience” (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999, p. 261). Two viewpoints of constructivist theories
exist. They include the individual constructivist view and the social constructivist view.
The individualist constructivist view understands learning to be an intrinsically personal
process whereby “meaning is made by the individual and is dependent upon the individual’s
previous and current knowledge structure” (p. 261) and as a result can be considered an
“internal cognitive activity” (p. 262). The social constructivist view, however, premises that
learning is constructed through social interaction and discourse and is considered, according
to Drivers and others (1994), to be a process in which meaning is made dialogically (Merriam
& Caffarella, 1999).

2.4 Constructivist theory and independent learning
When applying this theory to independent learning, it is essential to understand that we need
to consider the cultural environment in which this learning takes place. Isolated learning is
an oxymoron. Merriam and Caffarella (1999) suggest that adult learning, while self-directed,
must have input from outside influences. That may take the form of investigation, social
interaction, or more formal learning environments.

12

See Also
The constructivistic learning approach involves educators building school curriculum around
the experience of their students. Constructivists believe learner-centric instructional classroom methods will strengthen the commitment and involvement of self-motivated learners
because of their high level of interaction. Today, there is a trend for incorporating technology
into the classrooms to support instructional learning methods. Yet, recent studies have
revealed technology is not effectively integrated with the concepts of constructivism (Hare
et al, 2005).
Nevertheless, constructivistic methods of instruction with using computer technology have
developed to meet the instructional goals and conditions. One of the most powerful and
versatile tools is the web-based learning. The web-based learning provides learners with
optimal learning environment. They can be exposed to the multiple perspectives through
collaborative social negotiation within peers or teachers. Additionally, in spite of PC games
which originally have not been developed for instructional purposes, even in games such as
games for virtual flight simulation or city planning simulation, learners can be exposed to
the complex or probable environments. In order to improve the problem-solving skills, it
is important for learners to be exposed to complex environments. Constructivism might
be broad learning theory because it is synthesized with multiple theories into a single form.
Thus it is evident that the method of instruction using technology can be applied with
various approaches.
Constructivist theory's (J. Bruner) main theme is that learning is a process in which the
learner is able to build on present and previous information. The student is able to take
information, create ideas and make choices by utilizing a thought process. The trainer
should encourage the student to develop the skills to find out principles on their own. There
should be on-going dialog between the student and the trainer. The trainer is responsible
for making sure the information is in a format the student can comprehend. The key is to
assure the course builds on what has already been learned.
Constructivists think that learners build knowledge actively through the interactions with
environmental stimuli. In other words, learning focuses on the learners' questions and
exposure. Assessment should avoid standardized tests and grades such as achievement tests
designed with multiple choices to test subject-specific knowledge. Assessment appears in the
learning process, so students play an important role in examining their own progress.

2.5 See Also
• John Holt1
• Contemporary Educational Psychology/Chapter 2: The Learning Process2
• Definition(s) & Reading Links:
http://carbon.cudenver.edu/~mryder/itc_data/constructivism.html
• Constructivist Models:
1
2

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/John%20Holt
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Contemporary%20Educational%20Psychology%2FChapter%202%
3A%20The%20Learning%20Process

13

Constructivist
http://carbon.cudenver.edu/~mryder/itc_data/idmodels.html#constructivism
• Teaching Practices:
http://www.grout.demon.co.uk/Barbara/chreods.htm#bk5
• Constructivism (learning theory):
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructivism_(learning_theory)
• Instruction:
http://www.funderstanding.com/constructivism.cfm
• Institute for Learning Centered Education:
http://www.learnercentereded.org/index.html
In Search of Understanding: The Case for Constructivist Classrooms, Revised Edition by
Jacqueline Grennon Brooks and Martin G.
• Book Introduction:
http://www.ascd.org/ed_topics/brooks1999_intro.html

2.6 Video Links
• Reasoning and Critical Thinking3
http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-2944672249148867588
• Group or Cooperative learning4
http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=1215234304122679474
• Ownership (grading one's own assignment by the use of primary spoken language)5
http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=5497177369833882289

2.7 References
Jonassen, David H. 1994. Thinking Technology: Toward a Constructivist Design Model.
Educational Technology, 34(4), pp. 34-37.

3
4
5

14

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Reasoning%20and%20Critical%20Thinking
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Group%20or%20Cooperative%20learning
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ownership%20%28grading%20one%27s%20own%20assignment%
20by%20the%20use%20of%20primary%20spoken%20language%29

3 Post-Modern
3.1 Overview
Postmodernism, by the nature of the movement itself, is not easy to define. To understand
postmodernism in the context of adult learning, it may be beneficial to first understand that
the postmodern movement is much larger than adult learning. It is inclusive of a wide variety
of disciplines and areas of study including art, architecture, music, film, literature, sociology,
communications, fashion, technology, and education (Klages, 2003). Because postmodernism
is as much a philosophical movement as it is a learning theory, it is impossible to discuss the
movement without also discussing the underlying philosophy and ubiquity of the postmodern
movement.
Post-modernism differs from most approaches to learning in two fundamental ways. The first
is that rationality and logic are not important to attaining knowledge. The second is that
knowledge can be contradictory. Because of the contextual nature of knowledge, individuals
can hold two completely incongruent views of one subject at the same time (Kilgore, 2001).
Post-modernism relates to post-industrialism. The industrial era came about as a result of
Newtonian thinking – an era wherein thought and processes were considered in mechanistic
terms of efficiency and effectiveness and understood scientifically through the processes of
reductionism (the simplification of the complex into understandable, and at times oversimplistic terms). The learning gleaned from the industrial (modern) era laid a foundation for the
world to add new knowledge through a new era - what is now termed as the “post-modern”
era. Presently, several post-modern theories exist, but at the core of each of these theories is
the basic concept that what was once only understood within the context of reductionism is
now beginning to be understood within the context of interrelatedness - an understanding
that “things are much more diverse, fluid, illusionary, and contested, including the reality of
the world itself” (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999, p. 356) than originally thought.
Though truth is central to postmodern thinking, it is not the search for truth that is valued.
In contrast, the postmodern mind challenges what is accepted truth. According to Astley
(1985) and Gergen (1992), as cited in Dierkes et. al. (2003), postmodernists challenge "the
conventional wisdom, routines, static meanings, and axioms of 'normal' science, thereby
exposing knowledge to non-dogmatic forms of thought" (p. 44). One can see how this
philosophy has become embraced in academia and one could argue that it is the primary
modus operandi in many institutions of higher learning, especially in philosophy and the
humanities.
The postmodern approach to learning is founded upon the assertion that there is not one
kind of learner, not one particular goal for learning, not one way in which learning takes
place, nor one particular environment where learning occurs (Kilgore, 2001).
Kilgore (2001) makes several assertions about the postmodern view of knowledge:

15

Post-Modern
1. Knowledge is tentative, fragmented, multifaceted and not necessarily rational.
2. Knowledge is socially constructed and takes form in the eyes of the knower.
3. Knowledge is contextual rather than “out there” waiting to be discovered.
Hence, knowledge can shift as quickly as the context shifts, the perspective of the knower
shifts, or as events overtake us.
The label of postmodernism defines a shift in culture that occurs over time. This can
be understood best through defining causality, an understanding of cultural shifts, and
collecting the basic overall concept of postmodernism.

3.2 Defining causality (What causes shifts)
Ultimately, shifts occur through modes of communication. The largest shift in the past
century is the development of a global community through the use of internet. Past shifts in
society have also connected to modes of communication. Technology shifts like Guttenberg
and his creation of the printing press gave the power of books into the hands of the common
people. This empowerment of information started a shift in society that affected the world.

3.3 Cultural shifts (How it occurs)
Cultural shifts happen in waves. Postmodernism as a cultural shift began its shift as early
as the 1930's and 1940's in conversations about postmodernism and architecture. Over time
the concepts and ideas that are on the fringe of society will affect conversations, artistic
pieces, and eventually become pervasive on a large enough scale to affect the whole of a
society.

3.4 The current debate (The basic definitions of PoMo)
In postmodernism everything is relative and is deconstructive. The division of the term
postmodernism breaks down into two major parts, post and modernism. Post is built philosophically on thoughts from multiple arenas, and varied sources, who use deconstructionism
as a modus-operandi. The idea of postmodernism is not to know what you are not, but to
not really know what you are. What postmodernism is not is modernism. It is an after effect
of the modernistic era that capitalized on individuality, built on absolutes, and the scientific
method as it's structure. Postmodernism in its current form is still developing and is not
completed. Leonard Sweet and other futurists say this wave will be complete somewhere in
the range of 2020, shifting the society from modernism into what it will become. All that
may be understood at this stage is what the society on the fringes is saying we are not,
which is modernism.
Deconstruction is a powerful postmodern tool for questioning prevailing representations
of learners and learning. According to Kilgore (2001), the purpose of deconstruction is to
identify and discredit the false binaries that structure a communication or “discourse”; that
is, to challenge the assertions of what is to be included or excluded as normal, right, or good.

16

The current debate (The basic definitions of PoMo)
In postmodernism there are no universal norms or “truth” on which to judge the validity of
any message of knowledge; rather the postmodernist works toward a continuous construction
of truth as multiple alternatives are included in the body of known information.
Sometimes it is easier to understand what a concept is by comparing it with what it is not.
For example, according to Boje & Prieto (2000), when comparing modern to postmodern
principles in the area of leading, Theory X or Y is modern while servant leadership is
postmodern. Centralized leading is to modern as decentralized, wide spans, and few
layers is to postmodern. Modernism is boss centered while postmodern is people centered.
White male career track reflects modernism and tracks for women and minorities looks like
postmodernism. Comparison of the theories indicates that servant leadership can indeed be
considered a postmodern theory.
Merriam and Caffarella (1999) contend that "The self in post modern thought is not the
unified, integrated, authentic self of modern times. Rather, the self is multiple, ever changing,
and some say fragmented" (p. 357). Postmodern thinking has moved individuals to consider
a new reference for self-identification. A life that was once in order based on societal norms is
now in a state of constant flux as societal norms have shifted dramatically in recent decades.
The "Leave it to Beaver" lifestyle is a faded memory. This causes educational institutions
and adult learners to shift education and teaching toward a more non-traditional forms.
Postmodernism accepts a worldview that what is real is what one observes, believes, or
experiences. For example, anthropologists see that . . . “the relation between part and whole
has been made problematic”. . . because “the conception of the whole is a construct of the
observer . . . (Smith, n.d.). Hence, what is real is what one observes occurring around them
and gives definition and reality to a situation.
Postmodernism calls into question many of the assumptions once accepted by modernists.
“From the postmodern point-of-view, modernism is defined by its belief in objective knowledge” (Lemke, n.d.). “Postmodernism . . . argues that what we call knowledge is a special
kind of story, a text or discourse that puts together words and images in ways that seem
pleasing or useful to a particular culture. . . . It denies that we can have objective knowledge,
because what we call knowledge has to be made with the linguistic and other meaning-making
resources of a particular culture, and different cultures can see the world in very different
ways, all of which "work" in their own terms. It argues that the belief that one particular
culture's view of the world is also universally "true" was a politically convenient assumption
for Europe's imperial ambitions of the past, but has no firm intellectual basis” (Lemke).
So what about the age-old questions about truth and knowledge? Postmodernists might say,
"Truth is what people agree on," or "Truth is what works," or "Hey, there is no Truth, only
lots of little 'truths' running around out there!" Postmodernists tend to reject the idealized
view of Truth inherited from the ancients and replace it with a dynamic, changing truth
bounded by time, space, and perspective. Rather than seeking for the unchanging ideal,
postmodernists tend to celebrate the dynamic diversity of life (Wilson 1997).
One can see that even once firm historical events, verified through empirical verification, are
no longer viewed as an objective truth, but became the object of one’s understanding of
the historical perspective out of their interpretation and story. Lemke quotes Foucault who
“said, in effect, that it was chimerical to imagine that historians could reconstruct a real
past; historical discourse is a discourse of the present, serving present ends, making sense
for us today out of the archeological traces of past human activity”.

17

Post-Modern
One of the significant difficulties organizations and individual relationships encounter is
communication breakdowns when widely varied world views exist in the same discussion
or dialogue. Lemke suggests that: “The phenomenological perspective does not need to
be limited to conceptualizing how the world looks different to men and women; it can be
used to examine how it looks different to the young and the middle-aged, to the novice and
the expert, the student and the teacher, the ghetto child and the comfortable academic.
We each construct our own lifeworlds, and even when we are in the same room, trying to
talk to one another, we may still be worlds apart”. Kilgore (2001) points to the difficulties
in communication that often misrepresent a message. The communication process is so
convoluted that a message can be distorted in many ways. The construction of the message
in the language used can be misinterpreted and misapplied by the learner. The cultural
context of the communication can cause a lack of clarity or bias. The recipients of the
knowledge are affected by other messages and experiences that result in many interpretations
of the same information.
Postmodernism, in the context of an adult learning theory, invites contention in the attempt
to discover the truth. Once considered a passing fad, postmodernism earned a strong
following because of its motivation to draw upon multiple theories. In higher education,
postmodernism encourages its followers to question every facet of the institution's structure
and learning methods.

3.5 Case studies & workplace examples
The postmodern approach to learning offers the freedom from absolutes. There is no one
good way to learn. In fact, there is not one good thing to learn. Learning takes place in the
experience between the learner and the knowledge presented. Our current experience with
all the do-it-yourself and information presenting, learning-based television shows illustrates
this point. So many of us find ourselves watching a television show that informs us of a
process or experience in which we will never participate or apply that knowledge. We will
never overhaul a car, build a fountain in our backyard, travel to Peru to examine ancient
ruins, or remodel our neighbour's house. The experience of interacting with the knowledge
brings satisfaction in and of itself. What each of the viewers takes from the same show
is inconsequential to most of the producers, the importance lies in interacting with and
enjoying the content.

18

4 Adult Learning
4.1 Overview
Typical adult learning theories encompass the basic concepts of behavioral change and
experience. From there, complexities begin to diverge specific theories and concepts in an
eclectic barrage of inferences. Up until the 1950s basic definitions of learning were built
around the idea of change in behavior (Merriam and Caffarella, 1999). After this point more
complexities were introduced “such as whether one needs to perform in order for learning to
have occurred or whether all human behavior is learned ” (Merriam and Caffarella, 1999, p.
249).
Jean Piaget states that there are "four invariant stages of cognitive development that are age
related" (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999, p. 139). According to the authors, Piaget contends
that normal children will reach the final stage of development, which is the stage of formal
operations, between the age of twelve and fifteen. As cited by Merriam and Caffarella
(1999), Arlin (1975, 1984), established from the work of Gruber (1973)on the development of
creative thought in adults, has attempted to identify a fifth stage of development, in addition
to Piaget's formal operations. "She [Arlin] contends that formal thought actually consists
of two distinct stages, not one, as Piaget proposed" (p. 141). Arlin (1975) proposes that
Piaget's fourth stage, formal operations, be renamed the problem-solving stage. According
to Merriam and Caffarella (1999), Arlin's hypothesized fifth stage was the problem-finding
stage. This stage focuses on problem discovery. Though Arlin's proposed fifth stage produced
more questions than answers, it opens the door to understanding the learning needs of
adults; to be approached as thinkers.
According to a literature review by Ross (2002), humanism, personal responsibility orientation, behaviorism, neobehaviorism, critical perspectives, and constructivism are all important
facets of, and perspectives on, adult learning theory. The most common treatments of
the research of these areas of self-directed adult learning are learning projects, qualitative
studies, and quantitative measures. Collins (1991) explores adult learning as the interactive
relationship of theory and practice. In basic terms, the adult learner studies a particular
theory and then puts it into practice when presented with the opportunity to do so. Thus,
the understanding of an adult learning theory can prompt practice and practice can prompt
adult learning theory revision.
Adult learning theories in and of themselves have very little consensus amongst them. There
is great debate on an actual determined amount of theories that are even possible, as well
as labeling those theories into groups like Hilgard and Bower’s (1966) stimulus-response and
cognitive theories as large categories of their eleven theories. Another groups dynamic labels
theories as mechanistic and or organismic (Merriam and Caffarella, 1999). Overall it seems
that the theory of adult learning is broken down into two elements; 1) a process that creates
change within the individual, and 2) a process to infuse change into the organization.

19

Adult Learning
Malcolm Knowles might well be considered the founding father of adult learning. He
contrasted the “concept of andragogy, meaning “the art and science of helping adults
learn,”. . . with pedagogy, the art and science of helping children learn” (Merriam & Caffarella,
1999, p. 272). Knowles’ original studies and writings arose from the assumption that there
are significant, identifiable differences between adult learners and learners under the age of
eighteen. Primarily, the differences, according to Knowles, relate to an adult learner being
more self-directing, having a repertoire of experience, and being internally motivated to
learn subject matter that can be applied immediately – learning that is especially “closely
related to the developmental tasks of his or her social role” (p. 272).

4.2 Andragogy
Knowles (1968) popularized this European concept over thirty years ago. Andragogy,
(andr - 'man'), contrasted with pedagogy, means "the art and science of helping adults
learn" (Knowles, 1980, p. 43). Knowles labeled andragogy as an emerging technology
which facilitates the development and implementation of learning activities for adults. This
emerging technology is based on six andragogical assumptions of the adult learner:
1. Need to Know: Adults need to know the reason for learning.
2. Experience: Adults draw upon their experiences to aid their learning.
3. Self Concept: Adult needs to be responsible for their decisions on education, involvement in planning and evaluation of their instruction.
4. Readiness: The learning readiness of adults is closely related to the assumption of new
social roles.
5. Orientation: As a person learns new knowledge, he or she wants to apply it immediately
in problem solving.
6. Motivation (Later added): As a person matures, he or she receives their motivation to
learn from internal factors.
These six assumptions dovetail with the thoughts and theories of others. Merriam and
Caffarella (1999) point to three keys to transformational learning: experience, critical
reflection and development. The aspect of experience (the second assumption to andragogy)
seems like an important consideration in creating an effective learning opportunity for adults.
The learning opportunity needs to be relevant and applicable to a person’s set of experiences.
Argote, McEvily, and Reagans (2003) point to experience as an important factor in one’s
ability to create, retain and transfer knowledge.
Critical reflection is the second key to transformational learning and part of andragogy’s
self-directed learning. Reflection/think time is yet another essential principle to creating an
effective learning experience for adults. Garvin (1993) shares the importance of fostering
an environment that is conducive to learning including time for reflection and analysis.
Adult learners need time to contemplate the ramifications of the learning experience to their
experience and responsibilities.
The third key to transformational learning is development (corresponding to the third
assumption of andragogy). Merriam and Caffarella state that “the ability to think critically,
which is mandatory to effecting a transformation, is itself developmental” (p. 330). If

20

Multiple Intelligences
development is the outcome of transformational learning, then an effective adult learning
opportunity needs to be created that will take personal development into consideration
Andragogy assumes the following about the design of learning:
1. Adults have the need to know why they are learning something.
2. Adults learn through doing.
3. Adults are problem-solvers.
4. Adults learn best when the subject is of immediate use.
According to Knowles ( 1984, Appendix D) an example used to apply the principles to
personal computer training:
1. Explain why certain skills are taught (functions, commands).
2. Task oriented instead of memorizing. Tasks should be common tasks .
3. Take diversity into play. Acknowledge different learning levels and experience.
4. Allow adults to learn on their own and from their mistakes. ( M.Knowles)
Some would contend that Knowles only introduced a theory of teaching rather than a theory
of adult learning. In commenting on this thought, Merriam and Caffarella (1999) referring to
Hartree suggest, "that it is not clear whether Knowles had presented a theory of learning or
a theory of teaching, whether adult learning was different from child learning, and whether
there was a theory at all-perhaps these were just principles of good practice" (p. 273). It is
further contended that Knowles did not establish a proven theory, rather he introduced a
"set of well-grounded principles of good practice" (Brookfirle, 1986, p. 98).
“Within companies, instructional methods are designed for improving adult learners’ knowledge and skills. It is important to distinguish the unique attributes of adult learners so as to
be better able to incorporate the principles of adult learning in the design of instruction” (Yi,
2005, p. 34). Within this context, adult learning is aimed at not only improving individual
knowledge and skill, but ultimately it is the goal to improve the organizational performance
by transfer of learning directly to work applications. Yi suggest three methods to foster
learning in adult organizations: Problem-Based Learning which seeks to increase problemsolving and critical thinking skills; Cooperative Learning, which builds communication and
interpersonal skills; and Situated Learning, which targets specific technical skills that can
be directly related to the field of work (Yi, 2005). Each of these methods support the
assumptions about how adults learn; specifically they are more self-directed, have a need for
direct application to their work, and are able to contribute more to collaborative learning
through their experience.

4.3 Multiple Intelligences
Howard Gardner represents those theorists who have dismissed the idea of one type of
intelligence as typically measured by today’s psychometric instruments. He posited that
there were seven (later eight) types of intelligences (Gardner, 1993):
1. Linguistic intelligence
2. Logical-mathematical intelligence
3. Spatial intelligence or the ability to form a mental model of the spatial world and to
maneuver within it using this model.

21

Adult Learning
4. Musical intelligence.
5. Bodily-kinesthetic intelligence, or the ability to solve problems using one’s body as
performed by athletes, dancers and other craftspeople.
6. Interpersonal intelligence or the ability to understand other people.
7. Intrapersonal intelligence or the ability to understand one’s self.
Gardner (1993) maintains that the first two are the types of intelligence commonly measured
by IQ tests, and which are commonly accepted as “intelligence.”
Gardner later added an eighth intelligence to his taxonomy, Naturalist Intelligence, which
he defined as “expertise in the recognition and classification of the numerous species -- the
flora and fauna -- of his or her environment” (Gardner, 1999, p. 48) Sternberg’s Triarchic
Theory can be viewed as an interpretation of intelligence as information processing. Li (1996)
provides us with a useful summary of Sternberg’s theory. He tells us that: “In Sternberg's
general theory, there are three subtheories: the componential subtheory, the experiential
subtheory and the contextual subtheory, each divided into subdomains of concern. The
contextual subtheory deals with the context of intelligence. Intelligence in the real world
requiring adaptation, selection, and/or shaping the environment. Measurement of contextual
intelligence would relate to the issue of social perception, culture fairness, and cultural
relativeness. The experiential subtheory deals with the issue of novelty and automatizing
of processing. It is related to the notion of learning and the dynamic interplay between
controlled and automated processing in the competition for cognitive resources. Finally,
there is the componential subtheory, which is subdivided into (a) metacomponents, (b)
performance components, and (c) knowledge acquisition components, which are directly
related to learning” (p. 38)

4.4 Conditions/Environment
Some research suggests that situational circumstances constitute an environment that
promotes or discourages learning. Those circumstances may be created by organizational
structure, positive or negative environmental situations, or time constraints. Child and
Heavens (2003) suggest, "The learning capabilities of organizational members are, at least in
part, socially constructed by national, occupational, or other institutions" (p. 310). They
further suggest that internal boundaries are established by specialities or departments within
the framework of organizations that hinder cross-boundary learning.
In following the thread of environmental issues within organizations supporting or hindering
learning, Starbuck and Hedberg (2003) suggest that positive outcomes are much more apt
to result in a positive and successful learning experience. They contend, "Pleasant outcomes
(successes) reinforce Stimulus-Response links whereas unpleasant outcomes (failures) break
Stimulus-Response links. As a result, pleasant outcomes are much more effective at teaching
new behaviors" (p. 331). This concept follows the transformational leadership theory providing positive opportunities for individuals to grow within the framework of organizational
life. However, it may be contended that learning through failure (i.e. experiments which
do not result in the anticipated outcomes) may provide a more thorough and circumspect
understanding of the given topic or issue under examination, although this method will
generally involve a longer learning curve. --The license to fail is often the surest key towards
successful learning which an organization may provide.

22

Experiential learning
Weber and Berthoin Antal (2003) suggest, "A key question is how long organizational
learning processes take and whether the duration can be externally influenced" (p. 353).
They further contend that learning processes that require practice are much slower than
those that do not require practice. Time consideration is an important element in considering
the process of learning within an organization that must meet specific deadlines or has a
client base that needs to be managed continuously. The conditions may not be suitable for
an elaborate training or educational program. Organizations must consider time pressure as
a tool that can encourage learning and speed up processes. However, Weber and Berthoin
(2003) contend, "Time pressure can both accelerate and slow down learning processes...is
experienced as motivating or threatening...if the sense of threat becomes too excessive,
however, learning can be slowed or made impossible altogether" (p. 355).
In 1998, the American Psychological Associations Media Psychology Division 46 Task Force
Report on Psychology and New Technologies broadened the definition of media psychology
and included eLearning and distance learning in among array of theories of learning to be
included in research on adult learning. Learning psychologist and media psychology pioneer,
Bernard Luskin expanded the understanding of "e" learning beyond electronic to included
sensory response in this type of learning when he interpreted the "e" to mean education,
excitement, enthusiasm, enjoyment and energetic, among other perceptions attached to
media in the adult learning environment. This expansion added twenty-first century thinking
into the theoretical framework comprising theories in adult learning.

4.5 Experiential learning
Experiential Learning Theory emphasizes the role that true experiences play in the learning
process. It is this emphasis that distinguishes itself from other learning theories. Cognitive
learning theories emphasize cognition over affect and behavioral learning theories deny any
role for subjective experience in the learning process.
Scholars in the field of education have two contrasting views when it comes to the concept of
experiential learning. The first view defines experiential learning as a sort of learning which
enables students to apply newly acquired knowledge in a relevant setting. The relevant
setting can be a sponsored institution of learning with trainers, instructors, teachers, or
professors to guide the lesson. The other school of thought defines experiential learning as
"education that occurs as a direct participation in the events of life" (Houle, 1980, p. 221).
Thus, learning is not achieved in a formal setting, but in the practice of reflection of daily
experiences. Kolb furthers the second definition of experiential learning by developing a
model which details learning process through experiences. Kolb and Fry's (1975) experiential
learning model is a continuous spiral process which consists of four basic elements:
1. Concrete experience
2. Observation and reflection
3. Forming abstract concepts
4. Testing in new situations
Immediate or concrete experiences are the basis for observation and reflections. These
reflections are assimilated and distilled into abstract concepts from which new implications
for action can be drawn (Kolb & Fry).

23

Adult Learning
According to Kolb and Fry (1975), the adult learner can enter the process at any one of the
elements. The adult learner moves to the next step once he or she processes their experience
in the previous step.

4.6 Anxiety and the Adult Learner
An interview with psychologist Edgar Schein, Coutu suggests that more often than not, organizations fail at transformational learning. They rarely fundamentally change the behaviors
within the organization. Schein dismisses the notion that learning is fun, especially for adults.
He equates adult learning within organizations with that of the brainwashing techniques he
observed while studying prisoners of the Korean War ( Coutu, 20021 ). Organizations must
find a method to deal with the anxiety adults experience when they are forced to “unlearn”
what they know and learn something new (Coutu, 2002, p. 6). Schein discusses two kinds
of anxiety: learning anxiety and survival anxiety. It is in this manner that he draws the
parallel to brainwashing; that is “learning will only happen when survival anxiety is greater
than learning anxiety” (Coutu, 2002, p. 6). Each of these anxieties could be managed, for
example learning can be constructed in a “safe” environment where the consequences of
failure are minimal. Survival anxiety can obviously be increased by threatening job loss, a
lack of security, or recognizing competitive elements of the market.

4.7 Jarvis’s Learning Process and Adult Learning Theory
One of the most significant qualities unique to adult learning as compared to that of children,
teens, and traditional college students is life experience. That experience offers adult learners
a meaningful advantage in the learning process. The sum of those experiences provides
many reference points for exploration, new application, and new learning.
Merriam & Caffarella (1999) review Jarvis’s Learning Process in a wider discussion of adult
learning. These authors quote Jarvis (1987a, p. 16) who suggests, “All learning begins with
experience.” Real learning begins when a response is called for in relation to an experience.
If an individual is unchanged by a situation, Jarvis questions whether real learning has taken
place. He proposes that new experiences need to be experimented with, evaluated, reflected
upon and reasoned about for the most effective change and therefore learning to take place.
Jarvis continues, suggesting that these post experience behaviors culminate in the best and
highest form of learning where change and increased experience have happened. Jarvis’s
model offers an excellent learning model that can assist both facilitators and learners in
advancing education and learning situations.
A few questions come to mind in light of Jarvis’s theory. Does Jarvis’s model reflect a deeply
postmodern worldview where experience is either ultimate or paramount? How might this
worldview expand or narrow learning theory? Does Jarvis’s model seem to accept the maxim
that ‘experience is the best teacher’? We can of course qualify this statement by asking
whether there is any learning which does not consist of experience in some form, whether in
the classroom, on the playground or on the battlefield.
1

24

http://hbswk.hbs.edu/archive/2888.html

Case studies & workplace examples
Is it possible that some hurtful and negative life experiences could be avoided if a person
learned from another person who has already encountered and experienced a significantly
negative life situation? Learning from an older or more experienced mentor provides an
incredibly valuable learning forum and support network. Listening, and learning from a
mentor’s successes, failures, or mistakes can help expand one’s knowledge base and shorten
learning cycles experience alone would require. It seems that living largely out of one’s
personal experiences also short-circuits meaningful, relational connections that expand one’s
horizons and better equip one to succeed in this world and avoid so many of its pitfalls.
Yet, it may be reasonably argued, that personal experience provides the most integral and
visceral form of learning (and I state this as no objective fact, but rather personal opinion,
contrary to how articles are generally written in "Wikeality").

4.8 Case studies & workplace examples
The adult learning experience presented itself in all of its glory and contradictions through
a curriculum review taking place in a school setting. The objective was to examine the
current school curriculum and evaluate it for strengths and weaknesses. The purpose
for this review was to both align the curriculum with current practice and augment the
curriculum to enhance student learning. Interestingly, the teachers involved in this process
seemed to exhibit all the qualities of adult learners mentioned previously: learning through
projects, applying self-direction to the process, challenging the process for purpose, and
some approached the process with much anxiety. Engaging in the process illustrated that
adult learning is individual and there were as many approaches to adult learning as there
were people involved in the process.
At GM, there are several examples of learning opportunities in manufacturing operations
that fulfill the key criteria of adult learning. That is, they provide adults with the need to
know why they are learning something, usually via a review of competitive analysis and
the importance of the topic to our improved competitive position. Secondly, they are often
done in a workshop-type format, where adults can learn through doing. Next, the format
typically will cover an application that will have immediate use and will require the students
to bring their experiences to the class to assist and involve themselves with problem solving.
Typical courses or learning opportunities cover safety issues, quality improvements, and
productivity improvements as they apply to specific departments in the plant. In these
workshop-style classes, actual problems are brought to the class for the students to learn and
practice problem-solving skills. The outcomes and recommendations are then immediately
applied in the regular operations.
At Medical Protective, adult learning has been promoted and encouraged among the entire
community. Some learning is required for work-related functions, but other types of courses
are intended to benefit professional development. Motivational factors, such as monetary
incentives, courses being paid for, recognition, and the hope of advancement have encouraged
all employees to participate in a learning course. By utilizing various information technologies,
knowledge programs can be accessed online, downloaded to a PC, or printed off for manual
review, depending on the need of the individual learner. Medical Protective employees are
constantly adapting to the changing IT environment in the market around them, and are
using these systems to become more efficient, knowledgeable workers.

25

5 Contributions by Discipline
5.1 Introduction
Just as a wide variety of the social science disciplines have contributed to the study of
Organization Behavior (OB), so too have they contributed to the subset of OB called
Organizational Learning. Greenberg and Baron (2003) define an organization as “a social
system consisting of groups and individuals working together to meet some agreed-upon
objectives” (Greenberg & Baron). When one considers the key elements of that definition –
individuals, groups, social systems, and objectives -- the disciplines of Psychology, Sociology,
Economics, Anthropology, Political Science, Management Science and higher education as a
whole would seem to have the most widespread and profound impact on the contributions
to the understanding of organizational learning.

5.2 Organizational learning contribution from educational
psychology
Educational psychology1 has contributed to the field of learning since the mid-nineteenth
century. Johann Friedrich Herbart may be thought of as the first voice of modern educational
psychology. His disciples, called Herbartians, were instrumental in enhancing the field. They
wrote on the subject referred to now as the schema theory and promoted five formal steps
for teaching:
1. Preparation (of the mind of the student)
2. Presentation (of the material to be learned)
3. Comparison
4. Generalization
5. Application
It was this group who started the evolution of researching and studying the field of teaching.
In addition to Herbart's work, we have the classic contribution by Bloom.
Bloom's taxonomy2 delineates six categories of learning: basic knowledge, secondary comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. Bissell and Lemons (2006) aptly
distinguish the first two categories, basic knowledge and secondary comprehension, both
of which do not require critical-thinking skills, from the last four--application, analysis,
synthesis, and evaluation--all of which require the higher-order thinking that characterizes
1
2

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Contemporary%20Educational%20Psychology%2FChapter%202%
3A%20The%20Learning%20Process
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Contemporary%20Educational%20Psychology%2FChapter%209%
3A%20Instructional%20Planning%2FTaxonomies%20of%20Educational%20Objectives

27

Contributions by Discipline
critical thought. The definitions for these categories provide a smooth transition from
educational theory to organizational and adult learning. Researchers can use this taxonomy
to evaluate the type of learning and the depth of thinking needed for effective knowledge
sharing to take place.

5.3 Organizational learning contribution from sociology
Dierkes, Berthoin Antal, Child, & Nonaka (2003) state, "Sociologists approach learning
not as something that takes place in the mind but as something produced and reproduced
in social relations of individuals when they participate in society" (p. 47). This concept
opens the realm of integrated learning as a part of our every-day life. It suggests that
a large part of our learning comes from the informal source of social relationships. This
further introduces the concept of practice as a prominent factor in the sociological discipline.
Dierkes et. al. (2003) further states, "Practice is a system of activities in which knowing
is not separate from doing and situations might be said to coproduce knowledge through
activity" (p. 49). The sociological discipline presupposes that every activity in life is an
opportunity to learn and that learning in casual social settings is as important as formal
learning experiences.

5.4 Organizational learning contributions from economics
Contributions to organizational learning by the discipline of Economics have been most
apparent in the development, usage, and mastery of analytical models used to improve
decision making. Organizations or companies must be adept at quickly learning the implications of the competitive landscape for their particular sector. For instance, let's assess an
economic model that seeks to optimize profitability based on current or anticipated market
conditions. To achieve a perfect, optimal decision, the decision-maker must have complete
and perfect information. Economic models and databases have been developed to improve
this completeness and accuracy of information. By use of such models, learning is generated
through the iterative review of outcomes predicted by models versus actual outcomes. This
iterative process then perpetuates further development of models and inputs that lead to
improved decisions or organizational learning (Greenberg & Baron, 2003).

5.5 Organizational learning contribution from anthropology
It’s hard to find a clear connection with anthropological studies and language concerning
organizational learning, although this is changing. The cause of this lack of connection can
be directly attributed as a result of literature and the use of language, for example, “in
the social sciences, the word ‘organization’ was traditionally understood not as a social
unit but as a state, an attribute or an activity, and the relevant adjective was ‘organized’,
not ‘organizational’” (Czarniawska, 2001, p. 118). Anthropology began to use the term
‘organizational learning’, as it refers to the learning we do, in context of social structures.
This is an important delineation of terms because it crosses disciplines. Understanding the

28

Organizational learning contributions from political science
use of the term organizational learning in this light helps focus on how we learn in social
structures, which is diffused differently than in the context of independent learning.

5.6 Organizational learning contributions from political
science
Research in the area of public sector learning is one example of the political science field's
contribution to organizational learning. Allison's (1971) research indicated leaders in public
organizations tend to use historical data to help make decisions and improve internal
processes. One prime example is the use of historical data to develop war doctrine. The
process begins with a war theory being transformed into a strategy. The strategy is field
tested with exercises and experiments. Lessons learned from the exercise and experiments
are evaluated and corrected. Once leadership is satisfied with the product, it is incorporated
into an overall war-fighting doctrine. The ultimate test involves implementing the newly
developed doctrine in battle. Thus, the battle generates more historical data for military
leaders to use in improving their processes.

5.7 Organizational learning from management science
The concept of management science is best understood within the framework of post-modern
learning theories. The post-modern notion that all existence is interrelated can be applied to
organizational learning by way of management science - purposing toward a new awareness.
Peter Pawlowsky defines this organizational learning approach as the
...transformation of informational and knowledge resources in integrated work systems.
[He adds that] innovation, growth, and productivity gains do not result from separating
tasks in the workflow of a knowledge-intensive operation but rather from integrating
and combining knowledge in order to develop new ideas and jointly develop solutions
through problem-solving processes (Dierkes, 2003, p. 61).
Margaret Wheatley (1999) conceptualizes it in her book Leadership and theNew Science
as a “focus on holism” (p. 10) rather than reductionism. She recalls Donella Meadows’
recitation of “an ancient Sufi teaching that captures this shift in focus: “You think because
you understand one, you must understand two, because one and one make two. But you
must also understand and” (p. 10). It is the and that guides management science thinking
into a new realm – with new perspective and learning gleaned through collective wisdom
and realized in a dimension not solely supported by rational thought.
The manager plays a critical role in establishing the learning environment for his or her
employees. Creating an effective learning environment will allow people to draw upon
resources, make sense out of things and construct meaningful solutions to problems. This
will emphasize the importance of meaningful, authentic activities that help the learner to
construct understandings and develop skills relevant to solving problems. The environment
for learning is best when the risk of failure is understood and the consequences nonthreatening. In other words, the environment must be one that enables, even encourages,
learning from mistakes. It is with regard to this risk of failure, where the differences can be

29

Contributions by Discipline
seen in the contributions between the academics and the practioners. Often it is difficult
for the practioner to encourage risk-taking and learning from mistakes, as the consequences
could directly impact the organization's performance. It is clear that those in academics
understand what a learning organization is. The difficulty lies in implementing practices in
an organization that augment performance and make a difference. Applying the concepts
of a learning organization to an operating company is difficult for both academics and
practitioners (Albert, 2005).

5.8 Organizational learning in departments of higher
education
Departments within institutions of higher education are forced to choose between two
approaches; maintaining the status quo in practice and presentation or seek to develop new
ways to engage students in the learning process. Apps (1994) noted a conversation he had
with a high-level university administrator. "[The administrator] said, 'We develop the best
and process the rest.' No matter how old the learners we are talking about, the emerging
age requires more than developing a few and processing the many" (p. 167). Institutions
of higher education and continued learning have to come to understand that they must
be more than diploma and/or certification mills. Students must be engaged relationally,
experientially, and academically. One of the ways this is accomplished is to assist students
in the self-discovery process. This allows students to take ownership of who they are and
what they perceive to be their life calling.

5.9 Case studies & workplace examples
5.9.1 IWU doctoral program
One example of management science (or holistic) learning is the ongoing process of creating
a learning portfolio for the IWU doctoral program. It has become apparent that as the
program progresses, doctoral student learning tends to become more exponential in nature –
meaning that new knowledge is built upon prior knowledge and what is learned in one area
is almost immediately applicable to another area. This was evidenced in a situation where
one student went to a work-related seminar and attended a decision-making/problem-solving
session. The decision-making/problem-solving tools gleaned at the seminar are currently
being integrated into various aspects of the portfolio, being taught to others for their benefit,
and combined with other knowledge and tools to construct workplace solutions.

5.9.2 Private school
Another example of organizational learning out of the field of education comes from a
faith-based not-for-profit private school. Learning within a school setting only seems natural.
However, effective learning can be taking place inside the classrooms, but a dearth of effective
organizational learning taking place within the structure of the school system. Organizational
hierarchy exists within a traditional school setting in similar ways to most business and

30

Case studies & workplace examples
companies. The DCS System is no exception to the paradigm. A parent corporation oversees
a governing school board to whom the superintendent reports. The superintendent directs
seven principals on three campuses. Each principal has a faculty and staff for which he/she
is responsible. Every teacher ministers to an average of 112 students (families).

5.9.3 Parents
The lines of communication are vast and vital. One important line is the one connected
to the parents. Although DCSS has struggled with parent communication over the years
some of the attempts of knowledge sharing and organizational learning have been exemplary.
The school system has an informative and current website. Parents can obtain “real-time”,
up-to-date grades online. A monthly parent communication goes home in hard copy and
can also be viewed online. Each teacher, administrator, and staff member has an email
address assessable to students and parents. The traditional face-to-face parent/teacher
conferences are still a critical piece of the school’s communication with the home. However,
teachers use phone calls and personal conferences throughout the year for additional lines
of information sharing. Additionally, the guidance office provides several evening meetings
for parents interested in college and career preparation for their students. This serves not
as an exhaustive list of the communication efforts of DCSS, but as a sampling of what a
school can do to share knowledge with shareholders that are not physically present in the
organizational environment.

5.9.4 The Salvation Army Canton Citadel Corps
The Salvation Army Canton Citadel Corps is engaged in a process to integrate learning in
every area of employee life. Such tools as an annual cultural survey, quarterly leadership
assessment surveys, monthly staff meetings, and quarterly staff day away events are in place
to introduce shared knowledge and to learn through social interaction. A current exercise is
underway in which each employee picks the name of another employee out of a hat. Each
employee then has one month to learn about the other person through whatever means they
see fit. At the end of the month, a simple survey is conducted to see what each employee
has learned. This process will help to enhance the social ties among the employees.

31

6 Triggers
6.1 Introduction
In order for organizations to learn, people must learn. Individuals within an organization
learn as they carry out what is expected of them, both written and unwritten expectations.
Written expectations are often delivered through job descriptions, memos, e-mails, and
official documents. What is less clear for individuals within an organizational structure are
the unwritten expectations. According to Maira and Scott-Morgan (1997), there are three
groupings within organizations that best support an understanding of unwritten expectations:
(1)motivators, (2)enablers and (3)triggers, delineated below.
Triggers, or triggering events, can be defined as circumstances which act as catalysts to
organizational learning. As with human beings, organizations do not learn proactively
(Watkins and Marsick, 1993). Given the tremendous pressures to perform and produce
results, organizations tend to over-invest in exploiting existing knowledge and under-invest
in learning or developing new knowledge (Levinthal, 1991).
Motivators are items that are important to individuals within an organization. "Motivators
correspond to what is actually important to people, what they value" (p. 78). Maira and
Scott-Morgan (1997)state that Enablers are those who are important to individuals within
an organization. This may or may not be in line with an organizational chart, but involves
those who are the actual "power brokers" within a firm. "Triggers are how people get what
is important to them: the conditions that lead an enabler to grant a reward or impose a
penalty" (Maira & Scott-Morgan, 1997, p. 78).
As motivators are items that stimulate individuals to learn, triggers (as explained above)serve
as a kind of motivator to stimulate organizations to learn. Motivator tends to elicit the
learning desire from individuals; however, trigger tends to force organizations to respond the
changes of the environment such as socioeconomic changes. The learning motion motivated
by motivators is more vountary; rahter, the learning motions motivated by triggers is more
involuntary.
Do organizations learn specifically through operational learning, or is conceptual learning
another facet of learning potential? Are these different levels of learning? Lane (2001) speaks
to this saying “another preoccupation of organizational learning theory is the elaboration
of a distinction between different levels of learning: between operational and conceptual
learning” (p. 702). These two levels are referring to routine and imitation that comes from
learning versus conceptual thought which assumes people will question processes they are
learning. These are different forms of triggers within individuals and groups as they learn.
Understanding these and other triggers will help a person, group, or company evolve into
learning organizations.

33

Triggers
An article by the Center for Development of Teaching & Learning titled Assessing Quality of
Teaching in Higher Education, noted the following means to trigger learning and include the
quality of "a) formulation of objectives and syllabuses, b) construction of handouts/selections
of readings, c) classroom activities, d) choice of modes of assessment, e) feedback to students,
and design of exercises, f) design of assignments, projects, quizzes, and g) design of final
examinations" (Mohanan, 2006, p.2).
According to Brookfield (1987, 1994), “triggers” are life events “that prompts a sense of
inner discomfort and perplexity." A life event such as a birth of a new child, divorce or
corporate downsizing can trigger the adult learner to critique their existing knowledge
through reflection and determine what additional education is needed for improvement and
job security. Knowing and understanding the triggers that motivate adult learners can aid
educators in the development and design of learning modules, whether they be educators in
the academic sense or leaders and educators within operating organizations.
According to Mohanan (2006), the characteristics of the teacher who is likely to trigger
learning include: "a) has a deep knowledge and understanding of the subject matter, b) is
committed to teaching and is hard working, c) continually seeks ways to improve, innovate,
and be up to date, d) has a strong passion for subject, e) has a high enthusiasm for
teaching, f) is an inspirational role model to students, g) has a high emotional intelligence to
empathize with students, and h) is eminently approachable" (p.3). Again, this need not be
in the academic arena alone. The organizational leader is in a sense the teacher and must
demonstrate these same characteristics to trigger organizational learning.

6.2 Changes in socioeconomic values as triggers
Jurgen Kadtler discusses how ‘social movements’ and ‘interest groups’ act as Triggers for
organizational learning. Some organizations are forced to adapt to surrounding social,
environmental, or regulational factors (Dierkes, Antal, Child, & Nonaka, 2003). Often these
factors are outside their control and they must react to them. “Whether the organization
acquires the capacity to manage the crisis and deal with the concern of social movements or
interest groups is determined by organizational learning. This refers to the tension between
and analytical and a normative perspective on organizational learning” (p. 221).
One such trigger is the change of socioeconomic values of society as a whole and within an
organization. Von Rosenstiel and Koch (2003) contend that for the past several decades
there has been a shift in socioeconomic values that have played a role in how organizations
learn and adapt within a greater societal context. In other words, as values change, so must
the organization change to be able to effectively interface internally (within the organization)
and externally (with stakeholders outside of the organization, such as customers, vendors,
etc). The changes that an organization must go through to operate effectively are facilitated
by necessary learning. Put bluntly, the organizational learning would not occur were it not
for the values shift, which acts as a trigger in this instance.
Akin to the concepts presented by Von Rosenstiel and Koch (2003), Kädtler (2003) suggests
that, "organizational learning that is triggered by social movements or interest groups is a
form of involuntary learning" (p. 221). The broad spectrum of social movements and the
clear identification of such is not easy to define. Kädtler (2003) contends that neither the

34

Technological Visions as Triggers
academic community nor the general public can easily define a social movement. Perhaps
Kädtler (2003)attempts to bring some clarity by suggesting, "Social movements are public
activities...(who) strive to integrate their general aspirations into the system of values and
norms that constitute legitimacy in a society" (p. 223). Essentially, as the social culture
changes, predicated by social movements, the values of an organization may change to
coincide with societal change.
Unlike the learning that trickles through an organization as necessitated by (usually slow)
socioeconomic changes, transformation processes typically require rapid learning that is
neither forgiving or without anxiety for those going through the process. Merkens, Geppert,
and Antel (2003) delineate the types of triggers for organizational learning both in the
context of ‘structuralist learning’ and ‘constructionist learning.’ Structuralist learning can
be thought of as learning that is the result of one way communication and fixed content;
whereas, constructionist learning is the result of interaction between the learner and the
environment. Listed below are some examples of these two types of triggers.

6.2.1 Triggers of structuralist learning during organization
transformational
(adapted from Merkens, Geppert, and Antel, 2003)
• Privitization and opening of markets
• Mergers and acquisitions
• Implementation of new technologies
• Influx of capital

6.2.2 Triggers of Constructionist Learning During Transformational
(adapted from Merkens, Geppert, and Antel, 2003)
• Need for legitimacy
• Culture Clash
• Social embeddedness of values and ideals
• Inquisitive and well-educated workforce
• Implementation of new technologies
The above lists are not intended to be exhaustive. They are merely examples of triggers
that can encountered during times of organizational transformation.

6.3 Technological Visions as Triggers
Microsoft Encarta College Dictionary (2001) defines vision as a “mental picture – an image
or concept in the imagination [and as] far-sightedness – the ability to anticipate possible
future events and developments” (p. 1606). Although visions have been heralded as an
all important component of organizational leadership, there has been – up till now, little
research conducted to better understand the concept of visions. New insight, however,
confirms that visions facilitate vicarious learning and serve as “points of orientation. . . based

35

Triggers
on core values and shared perceptions. . . .[and that they] do more than just appeal to the
logical and rational mind; they touch upon the internalized norms, values, and preconceived
notions underlying people’s perceptions, thinking, and decisions” (Dierkes, et al., 2004, pp.
284-285).
Metaphorically, overarching visions may be thought of as stars in the night’s sky used as
points of orientation for navigating the organization. It is important to note, however,
that visions – even overarching visions, are not necessarily fixated. This is especially
true of technological visions because of the inherent unpredictable nature of technological
advancements. It is within this context that Dierkes, et al., support Collins and Porras’
(1994) “argu[ment] that organizational visions must transcend existing products and practices
or they can easily become obsolete” (pp. 294-295).

6.4 Cognitive and Experiential Triggers
Clark and Mirabile (2004) put forth the concept of “knowledge mapping”, a process of quickly
and consistently organizing the mountain of information that faces an organization. After
devising a framework of categories into which organizational information can be logically
placed, a mapping strategy is essential to identify and classify the information. Clear and
accurate mapping would require triggers – words, topical labels, or key indicators in order
to differentiate the knowledge sharing into appropriate categories. Clark and Mirabile would
suggest a listing of triggers that in turn would create a dictionary of categories.
Clark and Mirabile (2004) use the term triggers to emphasize the cognitive content of
established knowledge as the basis for adding or “mapping” additional information to the
current body of shared knowledge. This is in contrast to Brookfield who stresses the context
of experience and the impact of certain events, often painful and negative, in the adult
learning process (Merrian & Caffarella, 1999). These events serve as triggers that motivate
adults toward change, evaluation, and renovation of the personal fabric of life. It is advisable
that when any discussion or research done in reference to triggers, care should be taken to
define the term in order for all to understand the context and framework of the concept.

6.5 Creativity as a Trigger
Cunha, Cunha and Kamoche (2002) suggest that an open minded and, indeed, creative
approach to errors may serve as the trigger for organizational improvisation and learning.
Rather than simply rewarding employees and managers for fixing problems, we should
encourage their use as stimuli for further learning. Consider, they say, “an example from
Nordstrom's department store where employees are encouraged to "respond to unreasonable
customer requests." Stories circulate about an employee paying a customer's parking ticket
when the store's gift wrapping took too long” (p. 148). This type of accommodation should
be rewarded and viewed as a departure point for a learning journey aimed at discovering
what caused the process to fail to produce the desired result.

36

Anxiety as a Trigger

6.6 Anxiety as a Trigger
Edgar Schein, as cited in Coutu, (2002), provides a useful and realistic view of the essential
triggers of organizational learning. He maintains that anxiety is necessary as a trigger for
learning. In this interview, he maintains that little is actually known about organizational
learning and that true organizational learning is more than the sum of individual learning.
Adopting a distinctly unpopular stance, Schein maintains that learning is coercive. He
believes that anxiety, or more correctly, “learning anxiety” (p. 6) occurs when we are afraid
of trying something new out of fear of failure, embarrassment, or the desire not to give
up old paradigms. Conversely, “survival anxiety” (p. 6) is the realization that survival of
the individual or the organization depends on change. Schein tells us that “the evidence is
mounting that real change does not begin to occur until the organization experiences some
real threat of pain that in some way dashes its expectations or hopes” (p. 6).

6.7 Summary
Stopford (2003) posits that "Organizational learning is a central component of the process of
guided selectivity in response to market signals" (p. 264). He suggests that a learning trigger
for most organizations is the market in which an organization functions. That includes
technological advances, global environment, and competition. Stopford (2003) contends
that organizations must follow any market changes that are relevant and change according
to the results of market study. One area that tends to hold up the response to market
changes is the administrative systems in organizations. The structural systems set up in may
organizations serve to insulate the organizations "from changes in the market environment,
or at least acts to delay responses" (Stopford, 2003, p. 271). He further suggests, "The
primary role of the system is to ensure that the variety of signals received from the external
environment and the processes of selection are continuously informed by the knowledge and
perspectives of individuals and communities of practice within the firm" (p. 272).

6.8 Case studies & workplace examples
My “trigger event” occurred four years ago. My high school was accused of recruiting
international students for our athletic program. The only truth in the allegations involved
some inaccurate information shared on I-20 requests for the students to spend time at our
school. There was also some misunderstanding concerning the guardianship requirements for
international students staying with host families. Nonetheless, the accusations were picked
up by the media and the state High School Athletic Association. We were placed on a 3-year
probation and issued a substantial fine.
The “appraisal” stage for me involved a great deal of guilt. I was discouraged because I was
not better aware of documents being signed and the overall process of enrolling international
students (both responsibilities were given to other administrators). I was embarrassed for
the school and my position.
The third stage “exploration” involved an internal investigation into the process, the
recognition of our responsibilities, seeking the forgiveness of our student body and athletic

37

Triggers
teams, and the absorbing of the falsehood and untruth printed in the media. The school
chose not to challenge the ruling of the state, but to submit to their decision.
The “developing of alternative perspectives” took some time as the consequences of the
ruling produced many ripples into the integrity of the school. After some further personal
investigation I began to regain my confidence in the school’s motive and purpose for enrolling
international students. Our missionary outreach program and our desire to offer a Christian
education to international students allowed me to recommit my confidence in the global
interests of my school. The revamping and revisiting of various policies involving foreign
exchange student has renewed a positive perspective in this part of our educational program.
The “integration” of these new ways of thinking into the fabric of my educational ministry
took place with an increase of sensitivity to athletic eligibility issues and an awareness of
the microscope under which Christian schools are viewed. I was amazed at the vindictive,
aggressive, and destructive position that the media took on this issue. This experience
brought into our thinking the need for extreme care in dealing with student enrollment and
the acceptance of student athletes into the school system. We successfully completed the
probationary period and have been reinstated with no restrictions.

6.8.1 Ford Motor Company
Two specific factors facing organizations today include social movements and special interest
groups. For example, Ford Motor Company has been advertising in gay and lesbian
magazines, recently. Some in the special interest evangelical movement has strongly objected
to Ford’s advertising practices and see it as a promotion of a lifestyle to which they object.
They have sought to use boycotts to convince Ford to change it advertising policies. How
Ford responds can have negative financial implications on either side. However Ford reacts
in the above situation will be a learning organization challenge. In whatever direction it goes,
“new organizational competencies have to be acquired if critical issues are to be addressed
successfully” (p. 221).

6.8.2 U.S. auto industry
Schein states that “survival anxiety” is the realization that survival of the individual or the
organization depends on change (Coutu, 2002). This is demonstrated very clearly when
one studies the U.S. auto industry and changes made for the sole purpose of "survival".
All domestic competitors have undergone significant changes as a means of surviving the
attack of foreign competition within our own market. U.S.-based manufacturers have had
to work collaboratively with the unions that represent their workforces to make changes in
wages, benefits, operating practices, and work rules. They have also had to make significant
changes in product development, styling, value, and quality, in efforts to maintain a presence
in the market. When there were only few competitors in the market, just 20 years ago, the
"need" for change was not as great. Now, with well over 300 nameplates competing in the
U.S. market, dramatic changes have had to been made just as the "price of admission" -- for
example without excellence in product quality and safety, a manufacturer cannot even hope
to get in the market. The threat to survival of individuals and organizations has become a

38

Case studies & workplace examples
reality, and has driven changes that are ultimately good for the customer. One wonders if,
without this threat to survival, would the changes have occurred at all.

39

7 Influencing Factors
7.1 Typical general influencing factors in organizational
learning
The factors for gathering and managing knowledge are many and diverse within a learning
organization. Three of the typical general issues or influencing factors in learning organizations are context, history, and survival. The idea of context is intrinsically tied to
socially constructed elements. Lane (2001) discusses this factor saying, “assumption of most
organizational learning theory is that learning is socially constructed, that is, what is learned
and how learning occurs are fundamentally connected to the context in which that learning
occurs” (p. 704). How the culture, or context, of an organization functions is part of an
influencing factor on the type of learning organization it will be.
One key aspect of organizational learning to remember is that an organization should not
lose out on its learning abilities when members of the organization leave. The concept of
organizational memory means that effective learning organizations should not only influence
the current members, but also future members due to the experiences, beliefs, and norms
that are accumulated along the way. Creating a learning organization is only half the solution
to a challenging problem (Prahalad & Hamel, 1994). Equally important is unlearning some
of the past that has not moved the company forward on a path of healthy growth.
Developing a work culture that values creativity and encourages innovation is imperative
to an organization that desires to learn and produce new ideas or products (Kiely, 1993;
Prather, 2000; Sternberg, 2003; Thompson, 2003). In an early article, Shallcross (1975)
shares the role of the leader in creating an open environment to new ideas - “the role of the
leader in creativity training is one of providing a climate that is nonjudgmental, of helping
each individual to realize personal uniqueness and the uniqueness of others” (p.626). Suh
(2002) concurs with the importance of managerial encouragement for the innovating thinking
of the worker in the areas of planning, learning, and production.
Amabile (1998) points to six general categories of effective management practice in creating a
learning culture within an organization: (1) providing employees with challenge; (2) providing
freedom to innovate; (3) providing the resources needed to create new ideas/products; (4)
providing diversity of perspectives and backgrounds within groups; (5) providing supervisor
encouragement; and (6) providing organizational support.
Second is the issue or factor of history. The implications of past endeavors and attempts at
growth or learning will affect the long-term view of learning overall within that organization.
Lane (2001) wrote, “A related aspect of the process of learning is a view of the organization
as an embodiment of past learning. The concept of memory as the storehouse of either
individual or organizational knowledge is further explicated by reference to the there term
‘mental models’. . . guide the acquisition and organization of new knowledge” (p. 702).

41

Influencing Factors
The ability of an organization to assimilate and diffuse both new and old information will
determine the longevity of developing a learning organization through healthy means.
Lastly, the issue of survival is the basic premise for becoming a learning organization.
Ortenblad (2002) says, “according to the critical literature most or all organizational
learning theorists indicate that survival is an important object for learning” (p. 95). This
concept is basic to human nature, survival of the fittest. In order for an organization to
exist long term, it must learn more than just new fads or moments of knowledge, it must
learn consistently over time for this is a learning organization.
Neilson and Pasternack (2005) provide a convincing example of this survival anxiety in their
account of Caterpillar’s change from what they term to be an over-managed organization to
a resilient organization. Komatsu’s early 1980’s attack on Caterpillar and the first losses
in Caterpillar’s history were anxiety provoking to the point that excessive bureaucracy,
centralized authority and a highly political culture were jettisoned successfully.

7.2 Human resource factors influencing organizational
learning
Organizations vary greatly in all aspects. Establishing an understanding of what influences
organizational learning for the vast majority of organizations is extremely valuable. This
would allow individuals in many different organizations to benefit from examining some key
factors that would increase organizational learning in their setting.
Lohman (2005) found the factors of initiative, positive personality traits, commitment
to professional development, interest in the profession, self-efficacy and love of learning
enhanced the motivation for informal organizational learning. Conversely, an unsupportive
organizational culture, others who were unwilling to participate, lack of time, and lack of
proximity with colleagues negatively impacted this organizational learning.
Shipton, Dawson, West, and Patterson (2002) investigated the manufacturing environment
and found that only two of five variables were associated with organizational learning: approach to human resources management and quality orientation. Profitability, environmental
uncertainty, and structure were not significantly related to organizational learning. Albert
(2005) found that top management support and involvement of consultants also facilitated
organizational learning and change.
A European study showed that lack of motivation, extra work, unclear roles, lack of
confidence, perception of role, insufficient learning culture, lack of innovation, lack of time,
and lack of resources negatively impacted organizational learning (Sambrook & Stewart,
2000). From the positive perspective, motivation, enthusiasm, involvement, clarity and
understanding of role, increased responsibility, perception as a strategic partner, a developed
learning culture, senior management support, organization re-structure, job redesign, and
investment in human resources, and the learning environment made a significant difference
in organizational culture.

42

Time factors influencing organizational learning

7.3 Time factors influencing organizational learning
Weber and Berthoin Antal (2003) describe six key dimensions of time that influence organizational learning: the organization’s time perspective and orientation to time, time pressure,
simultaneity, synchronization and windows of opportunity, learning cycles and life cycles,
and history (p. 354).
Time perspective
Within an organization, individuals, groups, departments, or functions, may all hold very
different perspectives of time and the implications time horizons hold for the necessity
of learning. Therefore, it is important that the top leadership of the organization clearly
determine the time orientation for the organization as a whole, such that decision-making
and learning take place in a manner consistent with the organization-wide time orientation
and perspective.
Time pressure
Time pressure can influence learning from within the organization (top-down, bottom-up,
peer-to-peer) as well as from external sources such as competitors, suppliers, customers,
and communities. Time pressures can actually slow learning, as in the case when the
organization is threatened by internal or external forces that paralyze the organization
for fear that taking action could risk undesirable consequences. Likewise, learning and
performance can be accelerated, for example, by the threat of deadlines or competitive
maneuvers in the market.
Simultaneity
External events and opportunities happen simultaneously and at a pace so frenetic that
no organization can take advantage of all of them, given finite resources and levels of
knowledge. This aspect of time presents a risk to organizations that they will lose control
over the timeframes of those activities they pursue.
Synchronization and windows of opportunity
This dimension refers to the sequence of events or the specific windows of time when
organizations are best positioned and open to learning. The sequence refers to knowing
which learning activities are best for certain times. Simply put, the right activity or
learning moment at precisely the right time will lead to more effective learning. Windows
of opportunity are relevant because there are times when organizations may be better
positioned to embrace learning, for example during periods when the perceived threat to
their survival is greater than the difficulty of learning.
Learning cycles and life cycles
Just as individuals learn through observation, experience, reflection, and transference to
other situations, so too do organizations incorporate learning cycles into their culture and
behaviors. The success of an organization often depends on how quickly the learning cycles
can take place. The life cycle of the organization also has implications for organizational
learning. For example, the age of an organization - especially the older that it is, can lead
to difficulty when adopting new practices and new learning because these organizations can

43

Influencing Factors
become set in their ways. At times an older organization will battle "legacy" behaviors and
cultural norms that are contrary to change and learning and adoption of new practices.
History
Weber & Berthoin Antal (2003) state, "History has an identifying effect for organizations"
(p. 358). How an organization has applied learning in the past can be used to apply to
learning opportunities in the future. The history, or identity, of an organization is in part
built on the collective learning of individuals and groups within the organization over time.
It is this historical dimension of time that actually captures all of the others and presents
them as a composite of the effects of time on the organization’s ability to learn. Weber
and Berthoin Antal (2003) state that “the influence of history on the organization can
be positive as well as dysfunctional" (p. 358). Organizations can use to their advantage
and potential success their collective and stored knowledge. However, they must beware
of obsolescence that may come with strict adherence to past practices and procedures,
without the consideration of new learning and opportunities.
Individuals, when given time, opportunity, and resources are quite often capable of implementing change 'expediently' when compared to teams or organizations. The lag in time
that so often hinders organizational change is called 'organizational inertia' – a situation
Starbuck and Hedberg say can arise from “slow sense-making processes and ineffective
information systems...[or when] individuals learn without their organizations also learning”
(Dierkes, et al., 2003, p. 335). One possible resolve to this dilemma is the Japanese concept
of Kaizen – an applied system for implementing continuous improvement through small steps
(Maurer, 2004). If we conceive of organizational learning as a necessary means for continuous
improvement, then it is not a far stretch to also realize that learning – taken in small, applied
steps, makes sense. Starbuck and Hedberg state that “continuous improvement, the daily
challenging of status quo, supports the notion that everything can be improved. . . .[and that]
evolutionary learning in small steps seems to work better than does revolutionary learning,
[especially] during periods of repeated success” (Dierkes, et al., 2003, p. 337).

7.4 Group factors influencing organizational learning
Factors that influence group learning are explored by McConnell and Zhao (2004). In their
study, they designed a diagram to show group learning in by integrating factors together.
The first step was group planning. The planner has to be very clear about the learning task
and the objectives. The learning community has elements that must be considered such as
"creativity, norms, belief, and status"(p.7). Factors that must be considered "interaction,
communication, negotiation, skills, strategies, feedback, leader, role play, brainstorming,
and motivation" (p.7).Lastly in evaluation , the following factors must be considered, "
performance, effectiveness, outcomes, contributions, history, experiences, and productivity"
(p.7).

44

Follower factors influencing organizational learning

7.5 Follower factors influencing organizational learning
Though shallow on the surface, Maxwell's (1993) definition of influence substantiates the
effect influence can have within an organizational structure, particularly as it relates to lower
level employees affecting organizational change. Maxwell states, "Leadership is influence"
(p. 1). Peter Drucker, as cited in Goldsmith, Morgan, and Ogg (2004), states, "‘the great
majority of people tend to focus downward,' writes Peter Drucker. 'They are occupied with
efforts rather than results. They worry over what the organization and their superiors owe
them and should do for them'" (p. 19). What is missing in this mindset is the ability to affect,
or influence, change within an organization regardless of position. Goldsmith, Morgan, and
Ogg (2004), state, "Organizations in all fields suffer when key employees cannot effectively
influence upper management" (p. 20). These authors go on to suggest 10 guidelines for
affecting change in an upward fashion:
1. When presenting ideas to upper management, realize that it is your responsibility
to sell---not [upper management's] responsibility to buy.
2. Focus on contribution to the larger good, not just the achievement of your objectives.
3. Strive to win the big battles. Don't waste your ammunition on small points.
4. Present a realistic cost-benefit of your ideas. Don't just sell benefits.
5. "Challenge up" on issues involving ethics or integrity.
6. Realize that your upper managers are just as human as you are.
7. Treat upper managers with the same courtesy that you would treat partners or
customers.
8. Support the final decision of the team.
9. Make a positive difference.
10. Focus on the future--let go of the past (pp. 20-24).

7.6 The board of directors as an influence in organizational
learning
Another area of influence is the Board of Directors. Tainio, Lilja, and Santalainen (2003)
suggest, "Boards represent the interests of the firm's shareholders...they have the power
to hire, fire, and compensate senior executives and to provide high level counsel.; By
performing these tasks, boards can facilitate or limit organizational learning" (p. 428). The
insurgence of shareholders involvement is due largely to the mismanagement of many high
profile companies in the 1990s, according to Tainio et al. (2003). This insurgence in board
activity and influence on organizations has prompted significant changes in organizational
learning. In turn, the situation has redefined the role of boards in many organizations.
Tainio et al. (2003) suggest, "There is actually a fine line between managing a company and
contributing ideas for managing a company" (p. 432). Boards who have become more active
do not manage the nitty-gritty of daily operation, they press organizations to maintain high
standards, closely watch goals and planning, and take a more active role in management
succession (Tainio et al., 2003).

45

Influencing Factors

7.7 Case studies & workplace examples
The factors for influencing organizational learning were evident in a significant change that
took place in a school setting. The administration presented a challenge to the high school:
students were apathetic in living what they acknowledged to be true; find a way to help
students apply what they are learning. A relative newcomer to administration, the high
school principal began talking with his teachers, students and other administrators and
listening to the feedback. Out of this came a program which meant restructuring the whole
high school week. Each Wednesday afternoon, the entire high school was going to participate
in small group interaction and then go out into the community for community service. The
school was able to secure four mini-buses dedicated for transportation during this time
period. This program has re-vitalized the high school. The program has been embraced by
the majority of students and the remaining students are facing positive peer pressure to grow
and change. The key to success was presenting the challenge, giving the decision-makers the
freedom to innovate, providing the resources necessary including time and transportation,
listening to the diversity of perspectives, encouraging the principal with all the roadblocks
that presented themselves, and committing to the program as an organization. (Amabile,
1998)
Organizational culture holds profound implications upon those organizations who wish to
increase their effectiveness through organizational learning. Burke (1985) quotes Schein who
theorizes that organizational culture is the "basic assumptions and beliefs that are shared by
members of an organization, that operate unconsciously, and that define in a basic 'taken
for granted' fashion an organization's view of itself and its environment" (pp. 6-7). These
assumptions and beliefs are learned responses to a group's problems of internal integration.
They come to be taken for granted because they solve those problems repeatedly and reliably.
"This deeper level of assumptions is to be distinguished for the 'artifacts' and 'values' that
are manifestations or surface levels of culture, but not the essence of the culture" (Burke,
1992, p. 10-11).
When persons within organizations operate in and unconscious manner due to the organizational culture, one can readily see how attempting to develop organizational learning in
a suspicious, distrusting environment could be highly difficult. Developing organizational
culture that prizes learning, growth, and knowledge sharing must be tackled in order to
promote organizational learning. Subtle and undermining forces in an organizational culture
can sabotage attempts at improving components of the organization, or even attempts at
organizational culture change. Leaders must be in touch with the pulse of their organizational
culture prior to or while seeking to implement change.
Leaders do well to understand the history of their organization. In the process of making
significant changes, one cannot fully or adequately understand the culture, relationships,
nor underlying forces at work. In a local church organization with modest length of history,
this author found it highly beneficial to do an elongated review of the full history of the
nonprofit organization. Understanding our roots and driving values and forces across the
years deepened our appreciation for our history in honest fashion.
Individuals who had been involved for several decades helped us appreciate our strengths and
passions while candidly assessing difficulties and even failures. While listening to individuals
share their individual, family, and organizational stories, we gained valuable insight into

46

Case studies & workplace examples
the past and some of the personalities who influenced for good or ill the culture of the
organization. While understanding one’s history does not assume understanding of culture, it
does at least help people gain a sense of where they fall within the history of the organization.
While assessing the successes and becoming aware of failures, individuals and the whole of
the participating persons discover more deeply the values, mission, and driving forces of the
organization. In this instance, recalling previous instances of entrepreneurial behavior and
resulting successes helped people to be open to new changes and new direction for the local
church. Such success stories lessened the fears of change, while creating positive inclinations
toward change in the future.

47

8 Agents
8.1 Introduction
The organizational learning dynamic can be facilitated by one, or any combination, of
"Organizational Learning Agents". Dierks, et al (2003), in "The Handbook of Organizational
Learning" identifies five agents of organization learning: the individual, the senior leadership
of the organization, boards and/or governing bodies, labor unions, and consultants. Each
one of the aforementioned "Organizational Learning Agents" is able to contribute to the
learning process and facilitate learning in a unique manner. Below are descriptions of various
learning agents and the unique aspects they bring to the organizational learning dynamic.

8.2 The individual as agent of organizational learning
Victor J. Friedman defines organizational learning as “a process that can be fully understood
only at the group or organizational level.” However, Friedman is also quick to acknowledge
the fact that several “seminal theorists. . . have tended to agree that organizational learning
begins and often ends, with the individual” (Dierkes, et al., 2003, p. 398). It would
seem, from this author’s perspective, that common rationale would, without doubt, accept
the notion that individuals are agents of learning in organizations. However, this author
also contends that some individuals would appear to proffer more knowledge within their
organizations than do others – this coming from personal experience. But what explains
this phenomenon? Friedman suggests that from his own agent profiling studies, and that of
others, there exists a “complexity and constructive tension of. . . contradictory attributes [i.e.,
proactive but reflective, and so on] that lead these persons to take on the role of agent despite
the potential costs” (p. 404). In other words, it would appear that agents of organizational
learning in all likelihood possess an ability or the characteristics to “move from contradiction
– that painful condition where things oppose each other – to the realm of paradox [italics
added], where [they] are able to entertain simultaneously two contradictory notions and give
them equal dignity” (Johnson, 1991, p. 85); resulting in synthesis, exponentially.
Learning is an essential and continual function of the individual agent as he adapts in an
ever-changing world. If the world would not be in a perpetual change, agents would not
face new information and would not be induced to learn. On the other hand, because of
frequent changes in the state of the world, agents have to perpetually modify their behavior
in order to stay adapted to world evolutions. Because of these factors, individual agents
play a critical role in the learning of the entire organization.
Maira and Scott-Morgan (1997) state that organizational learning "is the creation, adaptation,
or replication of knowledge by an organization to improve its performance" (p. 203). The
authors add that some companies have realized the importance of organizational learning to

49

Agents
the extent of creating special executive positions to assist in focusing everyone's attention on
organizational learning. These companies include Dow Chemical (U.S.), Skandia (Swedish
insurance company), and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce. According to Maira and
Scott-Morgan (1997), these created positions have titles, such as Director of Intellectual
Asset Management and are responsible for "measuring the value of knowledge in the firm
and of developing ways to increase that value by improving the 'knowledge acquisition' or
'learning' processes of the organization" (p. 203).

8.3 The leader as agent of organizational learning
Sadler (2003) states that in the learning organization, the organizational leader has three
distinct functions: designer, steward, and teacher. The design work is about creating
systems, strategies and policies and making them come together in such a manner that
makes the organization effective and efficient. The stewardship function relates to the
leader’s responsibility to ensure the organization’s long-term survival. The teacher role
is manifest by the leader helping others to see the ‘big picture’. The leader helps others
understand the reality of the current situation and the vision of the organization. Filling the
gap that lies between these two paradigms and creating a learning environment where that
can occur is the focus of effective leaders (Sadler, 2003). Coutu (2002) places this role of
teacher in the context of a continual learner. She would advocate that unless leaders become
learners themselves then transformational learning can not take place. It is as leaders engage
in self-directed, life-long learning that they can effectively teach others. Only by learning can
they lead by good example and create a “safe” context for others to learn. The leader should
hold the position of chief learner and carry the responsibility of maintaining an environment
and culture where learning is valued and rewarded.
What kind of leader can facilitate the learning that is required of an effective organization
in the 21st century? Surprisingly, it does not have to be the typical heroic or charismatic
leader. In fact, Sadler (2003) suggests such leadership styles may be less effective at creating
an environment where team learning and participation are practiced. This is not to say that
such leaders cannot be learning agents, rather the type of learning they tend to facilitate
is quite different from those who fit within the ‘Designer, Steward, Teacher (DST)’ model.
Charismatic leaders tend to invite passive learning, whereas leaders who fit within the DST
model tend to act as facilitators of active learning and serve more as a role model for learning
than a teacher.
There is no question that learning is the ultimate responsibility of the individuals within
the organization. And, there is no position that is more important for the individual to
visibly and demonstratively value learning than that of the leader. The leader, and his/her
understanding of his/her role as a facilitator of learning and an example of learning, can set
the tone and create the environment for learning to take place. As agents of organizational
learning, leaders can shape the culture and encourage learning to take place. Gigenrenzer
(2006) purposefully designed a culture that would encourage members of the staff to talk,
work, and publish with one another. Individuals were encouraged to interact as equals, often
socially, and with everyone. As leader of the organization, Gigenrenzer instituted rituals to
support each of these four principles for interaction to promote information sharing.

50

Boards/Governing bodies as agents of organizational learning

8.4 Boards/Governing bodies as agents of organizational
learning
The governing authorities of organizations are often at the forefront of providing learning
for their employees. Workshops, seminars, training sessions and other formal opportunities
are often part of the learning plan developed by the governing body of the organization.
Landy & Conte (2004) reference corporate universities such as General Motors University,
Xerox’s Document University, and McDonald’s Hamburger University that provide lifelong
learning opportunities for their workers. Many of these universities are well established
and extensive in the training they provide. Hamburger University, for example, operates in
Japan, Germany, England, and Australia and offers electronic and computer-based training
courses in 22 languages (Landy & Conte, 2004).
Boards serve as unique agents in organizations. Boards fill wide varieties of roles as it relates
to the overall oversight and or operation including organizational learning. In many cases,
boards are not actively involved in knowledge management or organizational learning.
Tainio, Lilja, and Santalailen in Dierkes, Antal, Child, & Nonaka (2003) suggest that many
boards have historically filled a more traditional role in organizations that tend to function
more passively, reactively and normally only would increase their influence if problems arose,
functioning in a type of ‘firefighter role’. These types of boards “monitor and control the
firm’s performance and align the CEO and shareholder interests behind corporate renewal”
(quoting Walsh and Seward, 1990) (p. 429).
Boards have increasingly become more proactive and “increasingly engaged in helping
top management reduce environmental uncertainty though boundary-spanning, to secure
critical resources for a company” (p. 429). This type of involvement would enhance
organizational learning by creating awareness of other system factors that affect said
organization. Furthermore, the capacity to respond to changes in the market, society,
regulation, and economic conditions all are affected by organizational learning.
Two primary concerns of these proactive boards, which are often more future oriented, are
their service to the organization and strategic planning and decision-making. As boards
involve themselves in strategic planning, “Empirical evidence suggests that boards that take
more strategic decisions are not very deeply involved in organizational learning” (p. 433).

8.5 Labor unions as agents of organizational learning
Globalization of national economies (Altvater and Mahnkopf 1997; Fricke 1997; Group
of Lisbon 1995; Howells and Wood 1993; Kapstein 1996; Muldur and Petrella 1994) and
advances in manufacturing technology are presenting new challenges for organized labor.
Previously, organizations using mass production techniques required very little learning
on the part of the union workers, as separation of duties and standard methods divided
work into specific, repetitive tasks. Union workers often tended to view any new learning
or training initiatives as suspicious or a scheme to replace them with more efficient, more
reliable technology. The outsourcing of mass production operations to foreign countries
and the closing of numerous manufacturing plants have forced unions to take on the role
of learning agent in their organization in order to survive. Unions have had to learn in

51

Agents
several different arenas in order to keep their organizations healthy. These include learning
not only in technical skills and abilities or specific tasks, but also in other, more complex
areas such as the impact of globalization; factors and features of the competitive market
landscape; multi-disciplined and multi-functional approaches to task completion;, social
processes such as team concepts, communications, conflict management, and negotiations;
leadership philosophy; and many others.

8.6 Economics as an agent of organizational learning
Akin to labor unions and their impact on organizational learning, economics also have
a significant part to play in organizational learning. Boerner, Macher, and Teece (2003)
contend, "The process of a market reaching its equilibrium is fundamentally a learning
process" (p. 106). Changing circumstances and uncertainty of economic environment provides
a continual atmosphere for organizational learning and adaptation. Goldsmith, Morgan, and
Ogg (2004) support the increased concept of economics in organizational learning. They
contend, "Today we see another shift...after a prosperous economic decade in the 1990s,
the recession that followed forced shareholders to reevaluate what they expected from the
executives...Executives have gone from being judged using a measure of five-to-ten year
periods to having their achievements assessed in mere months" (p. 137). The bottom line
for shareholders is economics and the success of an organization to thrive to its maximum
potential on their behalf. Keeping abreast of changing economic times is essential to growing
a successful organization. Boerner, et al. (2003) suggest, "Few, if any, modern economists
would question the paramount importance of learning and learning processes to a firm's
competitive performance" (p. 111).

8.7 Consultants as agents of organizational learning
The greatest agent for organizational change is the socialization aspect of culture. If an
organization takes on the identity of a growing, adapting, and learning organization, it
becomes part of the fabric of how they operate. This is the greatest agent for a learning
organization, authentic stimuli towards a common direction and common goals. It is an
alignment issue for the individual and the organization. English and English (1958) stated
that “the sign of learning is not a shift of response or performance as a consequence of
change in stimulus-situation or in motivation, but rather a shift in performance when the
stimulus-situation and the motivation are essentially the same” (p. 289).
However, in Rhodes' study it is contended that organizations are able to learn and this is
demostrated by the change in behavior of its members. These changes are noted collectively
and are adaptations of their environment. Rhodes continues by noting that Argyris &
Schon's research contends individuals act as "learning agents" by determining and fixing
flaws in the organizations behavior and, in turn, change the culture.

52

Case studies & workplace examples

8.8 Case studies & workplace examples
8.8.1 HR manager
Quite often organizational learning comes about from the direct input of individual agents of
learning – those individuals who champion new learning or new ways of learning within the
organization. One example of this is that of an HR Manager who sought a newer, better way
to train and educate employees through the concept of a corporate university - despite the
fact that having a university seemed a bit far fetched for the not-for-profit entity employing
just seventy employees. Nonetheless, the manger completed research on the subject matter,
ending the study with a written and oral proposal to the Management Team. The concept
was unanimously accepted and forwarded to the Board of Trustees whose members also
voted unanimously to accept the proposal. The university has since been funded by grant
monies through the Friends of the Library group and is formally seated with a committee
responsible for its establishment and ongoing success.

8.8.2 The Canton Corps
The Canton Corps of The Salvation Army has moved through a process of organizational
restructuring during the past two years. The process has been difficult for many employees
who were satisfied with the status quo. The responsibility of educating the staff to the
cultural change came from the Corps leaders. The process, while difficult, challenging, and
at times nearly unachievable has resulted in a more efficient and cohesive staff, effective
ministry, and an environment that is becoming a pleasant place to work. In this case, new
learning was influenced by the leaders and they became the change agents.

8.8.3 Churches
Local churches utilize a wide variety of forms of governance and have significantly varying
roles when it comes to board involvement and how they interact with the local minister
and congregation. In some cases, boards fulfill a strong leadership role in the congregation,
while others fill more functional and administrative roles. Board members must be aware
of their role and how they are to function and interact within those roles. Without that
information and clarified purpose, board members can have high levels of confusion or
frustration regarding their responsibilities. In this author’s local church, we have begun to
review annually our church board’s defined roles and responsibilities. This has enhanced
our awareness of our purpose and improved our sense of responsibility as a group. Specific
details and outlines are incorporated into a leadership notebook containing this information
and reports, recommendations, and other materials from each meeting. Board members find
this type of information helpful and it answers many of their questions. As they learn and
identify their role as a board, organizational learning is taking place and enhanced. This
improves their performance and input.
An example of leaders as agents of learning can be found at GM, where we have adopted an
approach of leaders as teachers. The positional leader in the organization is often required
to teach in a cascading process throughout the organization. Our feedback from employees

53

Agents
provides evidence that most employees appreciate learning that is endorsed, even taught, by
their immediate supervisor or leader. As such, all new initiatives, change processes, or other
processes are accompanied by training that is led and taught by the leader. This is especially
true when it comes to cultural or leadership training, as compared to technical skill training.
Cultural or leadership training is typically delivered beginning with the CEO, and cascaded
throughout the company by level, in a process we call "Leaders Teach". Naturally, since
this approach is taken from top to bottom in the company, it could also be called "Leaders
Learn".

54

9 Processes
9.1 Introduction
The purpose of organizational learning often leans toward positive organizational change. In
some cases, entire organizational change is desired or necessary for increased effectiveness or
just continued existence. Most organizations are imperfect, and positive change, even at
significant levels would be welcomed. The agents of organizational change, organizational
development, and organizational learning often work together in synchronous fashion. In
fact, it may be difficult at times to distinguish between them. What kinds of processes
are necessary to create a value for organizational learning, knowledge sharing, and even
wholesale organizational change?
A study by Dr. V. Balasubramanianhe sites Huber's literature review as identifying four
processes that contribute to organizational learning. The first process, knowledge acquisition,
happens when the organization gains knowledge by observing the environment, using storage
systems to maintain knowledge and carrying out research. Information distribution, the
second process, occurs when the organization shares the knowledge they possess with their
members. The third process, identified as information interpretation, is information that
has shared meaning among the members. The fourth and final process - organizational
memory process, encapsulates how knowledge is stored for future use and to what extent it
is considered proprietary information belonging to the corporation.

9.2 Knowledge acquisition process
Buchel and Raub (2003) state that "A match between the learning process and media richness
and scope is necessary in order to foster learning within organizations" (p. 531). There
exists a tradeoff between rich media and media that is high in scope. For example, faceto-face communication is a medium-high in richness, but it has limited scope. Conversely,
formal written communication has a broader reach, but lacks the richness that face-toface communications can provide. New introductions of technologies have challenged the
original scale, prompting consideration for other variables such as speed of communication,
storage capability, interconnectivity between people and organizations, and the integration
of multiple computer technologies and their effect on organizational learning.
Nonaka, Toyama, and Byosiere write that, historically, the knowledge-creation process has
been considered within the context of two types of models: top-down or bottom-up. The
top-down model is representational of a bureaucratic organizational learning system whereas
the bottom-up model depicts autonomy with an emphasis on individual learning (Dierkes,
et al., 2004). The authors suggest that “a third [model] - the middle-up-down management
model, as the most suitable for knowledge creation. . . given the limitations of the top-down

55

Processes
and bottom-up models. . . ” (p. 505). While the new model does not discredit the need
for top-down and bottom-up contributions, it does more clearly define the “cooperative
relationships and interactions between top, middle, and lower managers” (p. 505) with an
emphasis on the roles that each level plays in the organizational learning process.
Trompenaars and Hampton-Tuner (2004) agree that a middle-up-down approach can give
a balance to organizational learning. The key to effective communication and knowledge
sharing is the middle manager, who serves as an interpreter between the language of the
"ivory towers" and the language of the "trenches." The middle manager must become fluent in
corporate philosophy and policy as well as in grass-roots jargon that permeates the employee
culture at any given time. For this approach to work there must be significant trust in the
middle manager granted from both the top and the bottom. In pragmatic reality, the middle
manager is the most important administrative position and the most valuable employee for
without him/her organizational learning is ineffective or counter-productive. Trompenaars
and Hampton-Tuner summarize the vital concept of middle-up-down by sharing, “middle
management is the bridge between the standards of top management and the chaotic reality
of those on the front lines.” (p.16).

9.3 Information distribution process
Based on theories that suggest adults learn largely through their experiences, organizations
would be well served to develop learning processes that use experience and reflection as
the foundational elements. Similar to Kolb’s learning cycle for individuals, organizations
have developed learning processes based on the same assumptions; that is, learning comes
from an event; reflection upon that event; extracting learning and planning for new actions;
and finally, applications of the learning to the next cycle (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999). For
example, in manufacturing operations, new introductions (both product and process) often
begin with the formal reflection of experiences with the current product or process. This
formal reflection is started by assembling a cross-functional project team, responsible for
the new introduction. To the extent that companies utilize these cross-functional teams to
develop and introduce new products and processes, they elevate the learning and reflection
from that which is meaningful to individuals, to that which involves and benefits the entire
organization. New technologies, such as those discussed by Buchel and Raub (2003), can
be enablers to improving the effectiveness of cross-functional teams that are increasingly
global in nature and demand process capability for fast and effective storage and retrieval of
organizational knowledge, history, and experience.
Many companies rely on media to help aid their organizational learning processes. In
order to ensure the success of learning processes, organizations must consider two factors
when selecting from various communications mediums such as face-to-face communication,
tele-conferencing, telephone, voice mail, fax, electronic communication, and formal written
communication. (Sitkin et al, 1992). Thus, they must find a balance between media richness
and media scope. The proper selection of media richness provides organizations with the
"ability to process information of appropriate richness to reduce uncertainty and clarify
ambiguity" (Daft and Lengel, 1984, p. 194). As for media scope, this factor deals with
how well followers "keep messages in memory, and reach, referring to the ability to address
multiple people simultaneously" (Dierkes et al, 2003, p. 522). However, before selecting a

56

Information interpretation process
communications medium to aid the organizational learning process, organizational leaders
must determine each medium's ability to provide feedback, multiple cues, tailor messages,
and express emotions.
In addition to the media, physical space is also a consideration for specific activities designed
to encourage organizational learning. Lewis and Moultrie (2005) found that there are several
factors important in the design and structure of the physical space dedicated to promoting
organizational learning and innovation. They suggest that investing in a laboratory designed
for the process not only produces better interaction, but also shows the organization’s
commitment to the goal of organizational learning. The facility should remove the individual
from ordinary daily activity, de-emphasize traditional hierarchy such as rectangular tables
and traditional chairs, and encourage participation by all. This environment facilitates the
process for organizational learning. Others would suggest that these "learning laboratories"
should replicate the actual workplace in which the student will apply the learning. While
this lab may be physically separate and removed from the routine daily activity, it should
be similar enough that the adult learner can see the value; that is the learner must be able
to see application opportunity in their return to regular duties as soon as possible after the
new knowledge is gained.

9.4 Information interpretation process
According to Maira and Scott-Morgan (1997), organizations view learning more narrowly
than they should. "Organizational learning actually needs to take place in many different
parts of an organization and on many different subjects" (p. 211). The authors proceed to
articulate the process of learning within an organization, suggesting that this process may
be divided between two fields on a learning matrix:
1. Who is learning (horizontal)?
2. What the learning is about (vertical)?
The horizontal column establishes who is learning, which is delineated into four separate
columns:
1. Individual
2. Team
3. Organization
4. Community (interorganizational)
According to the authors, what must be established are the learning needs of each of the
four organizational subgroups. "[The organization] cannot assume that large investments
in the education and training of individual employees will create effective organizational
learning, nor can it ignore the need to invest in individual learning and growth" (p. 212).
On the vertical dimension of this learning matrix are the details of what is being learned
within the organizational sub groupings:
1. Procedure
2. Business process
3. Mental model
4. Vision

57

Processes
As an organization embarks upon a learning process, knowing who is learning and what is
being learned should be gauged for measurable effectiveness.

9.5 Organizational memory process
Knowledge is the key asset of the learning organization. Organizational memory extends
and amplifies this asset by capturing, organizing, disseminating, and reusing the knowledge
created by its employees. The term organizational memory is sometimes used to refer to
whatever exists today in the way of social conventions, individuals’ memories, etc.
There is an important step in the process of learning. This step is taken when there is a shift
from being an individual learner to leading or managing an organizational learning scenario.
An organization has to take specific steps in development to adopt or diffuse information
from individuals to corporate routine. This is what Levitt and March (1988) refer to as
the encoding of inferences from history into organizational routines. These “organizational
routines are transmitted and improved upon through socialization, education, imitation,
problem-solving, and personnel movement” (Levitt and March, 1988, p. 320).
In the global environment, a new learning dilemma faces organizations and firms. Macharzina,
Oesterle, and Brodel (2003) contend, "It is maintained that the major characteristic of
internationalization processes is the incremental nature of successive learning through stages
of increased commitment to diverse foreign markets" (p. 638). This slow, tedious process
that Macharzina, et al. (2003) suggest is essential to successful international involvement.
However, the process is streamlined by organizations willing to invest human capital toward
developing cross-border "synergies of knowledge" (Macharzina, et al., 2003, p. 640) that will
facilitate a broader understanding of cultural, political and economic differences.

9.6 Case studies & workplace examples
9.6.1 Anderson and Maize
Anderson and Maize (2005) share the story of Canon USA who experienced significant
growth in an extended sales and distribution organization through the establishment of
a system of learning and development. They have created the “Learning Zone”, utilizing
cutting edge technology to blend product information, training and support. Motivated
because of the increasing demands of product complexities, Learning Zone realized that
high-quality training and information were keys for their learning organization.
The Canon Learning Zone was launched four years ago and supports five distinct distribution
channels with 12,000 users, each of whom may need different courses and product information.
Based upon the markets he/she serves and the products he/she sells, an individual will
qualify to enter into a specific mix of courses. One Canon dealer shared the effectiveness
of the training this way, “Now, within a span of 45 minutes in the Learning Zone, I can
better understand the new product solutions I have to offer from Canon.” Direct salespeople
have access to the Learning Zone for support and preparation of customer presentations.
The Imaging System Group (ISG) at Canon USA has expanded views of the Learning Zone

58

Case studies & workplace examples
to extend the Canon brand and product training to all registered dealers, distributors and
partners carrying Canon products.
Mitch Bardwell, assistant general manager of the sales training division stated, “By strategically targeting each new sector with relevant content and training appropriate to their
business goals, in just a few years, we have doubled our size of our audience and increased
the value of the Canon brand to a loyal community of users who rely on the Learning Zone.”

9.6.2 Schools
At the start of each school year, one school has an orientation which includes new staff and
returning staff. At one of the orientation sessions, the question is posed to the returning staff,
“What one thing would you like to share with the new staff that you think would be helpful?”
The returning staff each shares a statement with the entire group of new and returning staff.
The statements are sometimes as simple as “Keep the secretaries and janitors happy – they
wield the real power” or as profound as “Don’t be afraid to ask questions – we all make
mistakes and we all try to learn from them.” New staff is encouraged to record, evaluate and
share their experiences because a newcomer often has the unique opportunity to help change
an existing paradigm that the rest of the staff is too involved in to evaluate objectively. This
process introduces the concept of organizational learning and encourages involvement in the
process.
Burke (1992) proposes that the kind of change necessary to qualify as organizational
development (OD) must happen at the cultural level. It is not enough to modestly change
functions, or organize and communicate better. "For change in an organization to be OD it
must (1) respond to an actual and perceived need for change on the part of the client, (2)
involve the client in the planning and implementation of the change, and (3) lead to change
in the organization's culture" (p. 8-9). Hence, the most effective change needed is at the core
and culture levels. It is the norms and values which underlie basic assumptions, beliefs, and
behaviors. Changing these underlying values is the ultimate goal of knowledge management
and organizational development. This goes beyond “fixing a problem or improving a
procedure” . . . it means, “That some significant aspect of an organization’s culture will
never be the same” (p. 9). “It might be a change in the organization’s management style,
requiring new forms of exercising authority, which in turn would lead to different conformity
patterns, since new norms would be established, especially in decision making” (p. 9).
Change at this level requires significant planning as well as willingness to make difficult
choices and adaptations to present norms, values and behaviors. It requires a willingness,
especially of leaders, to look within themselves at what drives and motivates them as
they seek to motivate an organization. The processes are internal and external, personal,
relational, and organizational.
The process of learning in an organization, processing that learning into tangible change
lies at the heart of effective leadership. Organizational ages and histories, among other
factors affect the willingness to change in individuals, departments, and organizations. The
processes used to develop learning organization and change can be widely varied. This case
study offers a unique process of catalyzing learning and change.

59

Processes

9.6.3 Congregation
A local congregation had been experiencing meaningful decline in attendance and strength
over a span of three decades. Engaging in a learning exercise became part of a change
process. Members of the local church were asked to study the New Testament to discover
various mental pictures and identities of the church. After a modest length of time, these
individuals met to develop a list of ideas about what the church is. Many of the lists had
repeated identity descriptors. When the lists were then compiled and synthesized, three
specific categories seemed to cover adequately the full spectrum of suggestions. The three
descriptors of the church included:
1. The Bride of Christ
2. The Body of Christ
3. The Family of God/Fellowship of Believers.
The final identity listed here seemed to be looking at very similar qualities, yet convey
them uniquely enough to be coupled together. We then processed these identity descriptors
borrowing the idea of ‘BEING.’ We asked the question, if the church is the “Bride of Christ”
in its being, what should it be DOING in its behavior . . . and if there is a gap between our
BEING and DOING, what should change, what should we be BECOMING? For each of the
three we detailed this question format of BEING, BECOMING, and DOING.
This process significantly challenged some assumptions about our values, mission, and
function as individuals and as a church. Clearly, we are seeing ourselves differently. We are
intending that our behaviors, our mission, vision, and values flow out of these elements of
our identity. That identity is a faith issue, for this is what God calls his church. Significant
changes came about because we needed to change and grow. However, this process drives
change from an identity, values, and purpose vantage point.

9.6.4 Canton Salvation Army
The Canton Salvation Army is moving through a process that is introducing a new leadership
structure within the local organization. The fundamental leadership structure is top-down
autocratic. The move of the local Corps is toward a lateral leadership model with more
open dialogue and input into the structure, process and decision-making that is involved in
every day ministry. The results are on-going as the Corps attempts to integrate a seemingly
foreign model into a structure that has been in place for over 100 years. However, there
are some positive results that are presently being realized. Teams and team leaders have
been developed and put in place. Monthly team leader's meetings are take place, as well as
monthly full staff meetings. Each team meets at least monthly and some even meet weekly.
Periodic fellowship luncheons are becoming routine. These specific steps are making the
transition toward a lateral leadership process easier. This has become an organizational
learning process that is unfolding as a continual process and not a quick movement into a
new leadership structure.

60

10 Interorganizational
10.1 Introduction
Interorganizational learning presents an opportunity for an exponential learning process. The
advantages of a learning process that takes place within an organization can be immensely
multiplied when one considers the opportunities for organizations to learn from other
organizations. However, there must be specific steps taken to learning interorganizationally
that is different from traditional organizational learning processes.
Interorganizational learning, referred to as collaborative learning in a recent study conducted
by Hardy et al (2003), requires a network of social interaction. The authors perpetuate
their social constructivist view of knowledge by referring to it “as a property of community
practice rather than as a resource that can be generated and possessed by individuals" (p.
326). The authors support their contention by citing Powell et al., 1996:
Knowledge creation occurs in the context of a community, one that is fluid and evolving
rather than tightly bound or static. . . Sources of innovation do not reside exclusively inside
firms; instead, they are commonly found in the interstices between firms, universities,
research laboratories, suppliers and customers. (Powell et al., 1996, p. 121).
From this standpoint, the authors explicate two venues for collaborative learning: a strategic
perspective and a knowledge creation perspective, each having their own benefits and
tradeoffs. A strategic perspective is understood as having more structure, established goals,
and a partner selection criteria; whereas, a knowledge creation perspective is understood
to be less inhibitive – having little or no formality that may inhibit openness and synergy;
both of which are necessary for going beyond the boundaries of knowledge transference.
As explained by Holmqvist (2003), a separate stream of organizational learning research
focuses on how organizations in cooperation with each other through formal channels, learn.
The research refers to it as interorganizational learning and it has conceptualized how
members are able to learn by developing sets of rules that are separate from the rules of the
persons organization. Therefore this learning group is indeed an unique learning group or
interorganizational learning group.

10.2 A knowledge creation perspective: learning in
multinational corporations
Since World War II the number of multinational corporations has grown dramatically
(Macharzina, Oesterle, Brodel, 2003). This fact is indicated by the growth in global trade,
which has consistently grown at a faster rate than the overall global economy. Multinational

61

Interorganizational
corporations (MNCs) have a number of unique challenges that they face, but the ability to
learn and adapt best practices from within the company, yet across cultures, is among the
greatest challenges MNCs must overcome if they are to be successful.
Organizational learning and knowledge management can facilitate the internationalization
process and improve the competitiveness of a MNC (Macharzina, Oesterle, Brodel, 2003). If,
however, a MNC fails to learn effectively or deploy learned knowledge across the organization,
much of the efficiencies of size can go unrealized and actually cost the enterprise dearly in
duplicative efforts and non-value added learning.
Interorganizational learning is the action of groups working together to discover a strategic
and operational path to help all organizations involve improve their processes (Cohen &
Sproull 1991; Weick & Westley 1996). Successful implementation of interorganizational
learning involves collaboration, trust, and empathy (Uzzi 1996; 1997). Recent events
such as natural disasters and terrorist attacks in North America have motivated various
organizations in the public and non-public sector to work together to ensure adequate crisis
response to American civilians. This is accomplished by having their emergency management
components (e.g. Fire Department, Police, Explosive Ordnance, and Medical Services)
engage in table topic exercises. As a result, trust increases among the organizations. In
addition, the collaboration can create new scenarios which provide new learning abilities for
all stakeholders involved.
The challenges of working and conducting business across international boundaries increases
the challenges organizations face in cross-cultural interaction. Macharzina, Oesterle, &
Brodel in Dierkes, Antal, Child, & Nonaka (2003) suggest “the diversity and complexity
of managing a geographically dispersed system of value-added activities is greater than –
and hence qualitatively different from that of managing operations with a single national
market” (p. 632). Furthermore, while these challenges originate at the foreign local level,
their “effects" are systemic, for they involve the characteristics of cross-border processes.
The authors though, further suggest that these increased challenges over time can actually
benefit the whole of the organization as the challenges are studied and solutions found in
multiple areas. These new solutions can be beneficial in other areas and new strategies
formulated can be spread throughout the entire organization. Thus while the challenges
may prove much larger than in singular national arenas, certainly an important factor given
the increased globaliziation of companies and markets. When organizations apply problemsolving solutions to international challenges, the effectiveness of the group or organization
increases its competitive advantage and organizational effectiveness.

10.3 A strategy perspective - learning in strategic alliances
Many organizations have come to rely on alliances with key players in the marketplace as
strategic ventures for maintaining a competitive advantage. These key relationships can
help foster organizational learning, thus giving an edge over the competition. This serves as
a primary motivation for alliance formation. In addition to the motivation of furthering org
learning, there are other benefits of alliance formation, such as the potential for significant
partnership agreements (Lei, Slocum, and Pitts 1997).

62

A strategy perspective - learning in strategic alliances
Short-term and long-term strategic planning can flourish when collaborative partnerships
with suppliers, customers, and even competitors are considered. Daft (2005) characterizes
effective learning organizations as those who have permeable boundaries – companies that
will often link themselves with other businesses providing each organization with a larger
access to information about current needs and directional trends in the industry. Daft
continues to state, “Some learning organizations. . . also openly share information with
competitors or allow competitors to visit and observe their ‘best practices.’ These companies
believe the best way to keep their organizations competitive is through a mutual sharing of
ideas” (p. 613).
An often successful strategy for organizational learning in a cooperative effort between
companies is in the sharing of a mutually beneficial marketing strategy. For example,
Advanced Circuit Technologies in Nashua, New Hampshire, formed a coalition of 10 electronic
firms to jointly market non-competing products - each member company still conducts its
own business, but, as a coalition, they now can adopt a strategy of bidding on projects
larger beyond what they could deliver as an individual company as they partner with other
firms for services they can’t do themselves (Daft 2005).
Strategic alliances and joint ventures are hybrid arrangements that combine strategic
objectives and cultures of partnered organizations (Child, 2003). Such alliances may
incorporate the blending of management systems, sales and marketing strategies, or other
potentially synergistic aspects of the partnered entities’ businesses. Organizations can benefit
from strategic alliances and joint ventures by incorporating best practices from partnered
organizations and employing what they have learned through their organizations as a whole.
In the best alliances, mutual learning is achieved through knowledge transfer, and through
the “dynamic synergy that may be stimulated” by experts coming from different backgrounds
(Child, 2003).
One problem with such alliances, however, is the fact that there are substantial barriers
to knowledge sharing that arise for any number of reasons. For example, the underlying
relationship between the partners may be inherently competitive (e.g. General Motors
and Toyota partnering on New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc –aka NUMMI) or one
organization has the capacity to absorb large volumes of information and the other partner
lacks that capacity (e.g. a large pharmaceutical company partnering with a small biotech
company).
For the most part, however, such alliances are beneficial for all parties involved, especially if
there is a substantial transfer of knowledge, transformation of that knowledge into usable
information within the broader organization, and synthesis of new knowledge that is the
direct result of the knowledge sharing that comes about as a result of the alliance.
As organizations continue to expand into new markets internationally, interorganizational
learning will provide cost-effective measures that will assist companies as they expand into
new global markets. Merriam and Caffarella (1999), citing Ulrich (1998) state, "Globalization
requires companies 'to move people, ideas, products, and information around the world to
meet local needs'" (p. 13). Meeting these local needs means understanding local logistics,
culture, and languages. The authors, continuing to cite Ulrich, state that organizations
'"must add new and important ingredients to the mix when making strategy: volatile
political situations, contentious global trade issues, fluctuating exchange rates, and unfamiliar
cultures'" (p. 14). If individual companies embark upon this enormous learning curve without

63

Interorganizational
attempting to learn from other organizations, even competitors, progress may be minimal
and likely slow its advance. "'In short, globalization requires that organizations increase
their ability to learn and collaborate and to manage diversity, complexity, and abiguity'" (p.
14).

10.4 Case studies & workplace examples
One of the silos of organizations that find it difficult to learn interorganizationally is
unfortunately the church. There are moments and places where this kind of organizational
learning can happen. One of the case studies for interorganizational learning is occurring in
Springfield, Missouri. Two churches, Calvary Temple and Parkcrest Assembly, are combining
efforts to create a learning organization. Rather than continuing separate organizations
they are uniting their resources of land, congregations, and finances. They have created
a step process plan considering all angles and problems that might arise. The greatest
organizational learning tool they have is trust and united vision. This is how they are learning
interorganizationally. They have a common goal, common direction, created together not
independent of one another. They are building on what unites them, not concentrating on
what might divide them.

64

11 Practice
11.1 Introduction
We have all heard the old adage, “Practice makes perfect.” This saying still holds true,
especially when it comes to learning. However, you cannot replicate something until you
know how it works.
An organization cannot become a learning organization until it understands how it learns
and transfers that learning from individual to corporate routines. Part of understanding an
organization and its ability to be a learning environment can be found by studying the history
of that organization. Fear wrote, in order “to illuminate organizational learning, a historian
would need to deconstruct the way legitimacy was rhetorically and symbolically created
within the organization over time, not just in a particular snapshot of time. To examine this
process of change, organizational learning theorists could analyze crucial turning points in
time when previous forms of legitimate reasoning made way for new ones” (Dierkes, Berthoin,
Antal, Child & Nonaka, 2001, p. 183). By analyzing the steps of development as they occur,
an organization can refine it's practices to best know how they learn, develop, and grow.
They then can begin to establish an appropriate organizational learning framework.

11.2 Architectural framework for organizational learning
Direkes, et al. (2004) “emphasize that organizational learning. . . requires both the appropriate structural mechanisms and the cultural conditions that promote habits of inquiry,
experimentation, and reflection” (p. 755). This reference to structural mechanisms and
cultural conditions is very similar to Senge’s (1994) suggestion in The Fifth Discipline
Fieldbook, that organizational learning is put to practice within a triangular architectural
framework constructed of three elements: guiding ideas (or visions), means, and practical
resources for application.
Imperative to the development of a learning organization - through practice, is the existence
of each one of the aforementioned elements; the lack of any one element leads to a collapse
of the triangular framework. For example, learning would be constrained if the cultural
conditions (means) of the organization were such that there exists a lack of commitment
to learning or intolerance toward errors. Employees operating in such an environment will
not be inclined to realize new concepts nor apply new methods so long as the means – the
cultural freedom to practice learning – is non-existent or is constrained. “Leaders intent
on developing learning organizations must focus on all three of the architectural design
elements” (Senge, 1994, p. 36).

65

Practice

11.3 Dimensions of learning practice
There are many theoretical positions and conceptual models of organizational learning.
Additionally, there are many tools and instruments available in the literature – a sort of
“how to” guide to organizational learning. Absent are the criteria that would indicate which
tool or instrument is best suited to a specific learning opportunity. However, Pawlowsky,
Forslin, and Reinhardt (2003), suggest that no matter the underlying theory, all approaches
to learning practices share similar dimensions. These include (Pawlowsky et al., 2003):
1. Reference to a system level, especially the transfer of knowledge from the individual
level to the organizational level.
2. A distinction between learning types – single-loop, double-loop, and deuteron.
3. A reference to cognitive, cultural, and action approaches.
4. A definition of process steps or phases in which learning occurs.
The authors go on to define learning tools as “instruments or interventions designed to bring
about one or more of the process phases involving the various dimension of organizational
learning (system levels, learning types, and learning modes)” (Pawlowsky, Forslin, & Reinhardt, 2003, p. 776). In other words, there is no single learning tool or practice that will
suffice for all learning applications. Looking forward, this definition and the framework of
learning dimensions described above, allow for empirical study on the effectiveness of specific
tools for various learning opportunities, learning types, and steps in the learning process.

11.4 Critical factors for organizational learning
Garvin (1993) cites three critical factors that are essential for organizational learning in
practice: meaning, management, and measurement, each further defined as follows:
Meaning. For learning to be a meaningful organizational goal, it must be widely
understood, have application to the work being performed, and be supported by the
organizational leadership. A key means of support is the tolerance of mistakes or failures.
The organizational culture must embrace reasonable risk-taking such that mistakes or
failures become learning opportunities that can be spread throughout the organization.
Management. The generation of new ideas does not necessarily indicate an organization’s
ability to learn. Until those new ideas, or knowledge, are accompanied by a change to
the way an organization performs work, then only improvement is taking place. For an
organization to learn, a change must take place and that newly gained knowledge must
be intentional and managed. That is the learning must be by design, not by chance.
Learning practices and policies must be the foundation of “managed” organizational
learning. Garvin suggests five basic practices that organizations can manage to enable
organizational learning: systematic problem solving, experimentation, the use of demonstration projects, experiential learning, and learning from others on the outside, e.g.,
benchmarking.
Measurement. There is an old management saying that “you get what you measure”. So,
if you want to know whether your organization is indeed learning, how do you measure
it? The earliest measurements, those developed in the 1920’s and 1930’s were learning

66

Core disciplines of organizational learning
curves and manufacturing progress functions. But these are not necessarily sufficient
for the level of organizational learning we are looking to measure. Measurements must
effectively gage the stages of organizational learning: cognitive -- where members are
exposed to new ideas or knowledge; behavioral changes – where members actually alter
their behavior based on new learning; and finally, performance improvement – where
behavioral changes actual lead to positive business results in safety, quality, market share,
and profitability (Garvin, 1993).

11.5 Core disciplines of organizational learning
Organizational learning focuses on the practice of five core disciplines. Those disciplines are
the foundation of organizational learning. They include: 1) Systems thinking-seeing things
as a whole yet being tuned into the parts ; 2) Team learning- the creativity or synergy of
the group, which practices open, honest communication and mutual trust; 3) Shared visionwhen the organization is aware of the goal or vision and the practice requires the knowledge
of how the whole organization works together; 4) Mental models- how we see the world and
the practice of bringing these assumptions out and assisting other to do the same; and 5)
Personal mastery - the identification and questions about your life purpose and the practice
requires deep inter exploration and the ability to take risks.

11.6 Organizational learning goals
Why would an organization want to go through the time consuming process of establishing a
learning organization? One goal for putting organizational learning concepts into practice is
innovation. When all available resources are effectively used across the functional departments
of an organization, creativity and ingenuity can transpire. As a result, the process of an
organization working together to overcome an obstacle can lead to a new innovative process
to serve the customer's need. Before an organization can be innovative, leadership must
create a culture of innovation as well as shared knowledge and organizational learning. Angel
(2006), explains the Continuum approach as a method being used to help organizations
reach a higher level of performance.
The Continuum approach consists of three levels: foundation, advanced, and breakthrough.
In the foundation level, organizations normally improve their performance by working
harder while terminating employees not performing up to standards. The advanced level
of the Continuum allows for cross-functional collaboration of individual departments in
an organization. At the advanced level, productivity and flexibility increases because
operational decisions are allowed at lower levels. However, "the advanced level will only
take an organization so far" (Angel, 2006, p. 4). To move to the breakthrough level
and help the organization reach a new level of performance and innovation, "an adaptive,
knowledge and learning culture" must be established (Angel). At the breakthrough level,
organizations achieve organization-wide self-actualization because they support self-directed
teams, implement robust learning information systems, and constantly analyze the needs
and values of their customers.

67

Practice

11.7 Impediments to organizational learning
Anxiety and stress can impede and sometime paralyze effective learning. Landy and Conte
(2004) explain a common approach to stress management often used in organizational settings
– stress inoculation. This cognitive-behavioral learning consists of:
1. An educational component: gaining insights into the “how and why” a person responds
to stressful experiences.
2. A rehearsal experience: learning and experimenting with coping skills and problem
solving techniques.
3. A controlled opportunity of application: time of practice skills under simulated
conditions.
There are some impediments that are unique to individuals in the organization. These
hindrances are potential pitfalls in working towards a culture of embracing learning. Impediments such as individualism, self-centeredness, lack of motivation, reluctance, established
behavior, and past negative experiences all impact the organization's overall efforts in
organizational learning.
Once an organization is aware and anticipatory of individual stress responses to the implementation of organizational learning practices, they can begin to affect the anxiety and
stress factors in positively. Learning can occur when the anxiety that surrounds learning is
outweighed by the anxiety tied to fighting for survival. The two ways to promote learning
are either to decrease learning anxiety by creating a safe environment or to increase survival
anxiety by threatening jobs if the individual does not learn. Educating employees on the
economic climate which influences survival and creating a safe environment where they can
learn is a healthy balance between the two (Coutu, 2002).

11.8 Creating conditions for organizational learning
The practice of organizational change must address issues within that limit and hinder
and organization’s growth and progress. Organizational learning seeks to address the full
spectrum of assumptions, behaviors, and values within, and the organization’s interaction
with the systems, persons, and groups surrounding the organization. While much of the
surrounding systems and environment cannot be controlled by an organization, they are
able to grown and change to address the challenges and issues within and without through
organizational learning.
Friedman, Lipshitz, and Overmeer in Dierkes, Antal, Child, & Nonaka (2003) “define
organizational learning as a process of inquiry (often in response to errors or anomalies)
through which members of an organization develop shared values and knowledge based on
past experiences of themselves and of others" (p. 757)
The goal of organizational learning is to foster “critical and reflective attitude towards the
information being processes, and that lead to actions to which organizational actors feel
internally committed” (p. 757).

68

Summary
This will involve both single-loop learning, which the processes by which individuals and
organizations detect and correct errors in their behavioral strategies and double-loop learning,
which involves processing the underlying values, objectives, and standards for performance.
“In order to make double look learning possible, Argyris and Schon (1974) took the visionary
step of prescribing a ‘Model 2 theory-in-use’ (p.7), which is based on three simple values
(or variables): valid information, free and informed choice, and internal commitment to the
choice and monitoring of its implementation” (p. 757).
Individuals capable of internalizing values will display a variety of attitudes and skills
while in dialogue with other learners. They will “combine advocacy with inquiry, making
statements that are discomfirmable, openly testing their own inferences, inquiring into
the reasoning of others, working with others to design means of protection, and jointly
controlling tasks” (p. 758). These attitudes and behaviors form the foundational framework
of genuine organizational learning and change.

11.9 Summary
"There used to be a sense among managers that learning simply happened intuitively:
organizations succeeded and survived, or they failed" (Berthoin Antal, Child, Dierkes, and
Nonaka, 2003, p. 932). However, research has proven that the practice of learning, whether
it is individual or organizational, promotes learning in other individuals and/or organizations.
And that it must be practiced to be effectual. Effective learning is not something that
happens accidentally or simply by chance. Effective organizational learning is developed as a
part of the culture, integrated into daily practice. New learning is emerging in organizations
and corporate environments and is driven by the fast paced introduction of knowledge
and new ideas from a variety of sources. It is imperative that organizations understand
the rhythms of the information tides and the emerging learning practices will have to be
far different than those of the past. Trends suggest that learning practices will be from a
variety of sources and not necessarily organizationally or theory driven. Berthoin Antal,
Child, Dierkes, and Nonaka (2003) posit, "The extent to which these practices actually
help organizations achieve learning goals will depend on how earnestly and critically their
members engage in assessing their experiences" (p. 933).

11.10 Case studies & workplace examples
The Toyota Production System (TPS) has become a global movement to streamline an
organization’s practice toward efficiency and productivity. Liker and Morgan (2006), share
insights into TPS demonstrating the integration of three primary foci for the system: people,
process and technology.
Four keys to “process” in the TPS involve, 1) develop, align, track and activate customerdriven objectives throughout the organization; 2) prevent problems with a wide range of
research and alternatives prior to productivity; 3) evaluate the flow of the process in order
to create a waste-free process; 4) utilize rigorous standards to reduce variation and produce
predictable outcomes.

69

Practice
Six principles comprise the TPS approach to people:
1. Establish a “chief engineer” to integrate the entire product process.
2. Organize a balance between functional expertise and productivity.
3. Develop technical competence in all hires.
4. Fully incorporate suppliers in the product development system.
5. Insure continuous organizational learning and improvement.
6. Build a culture of excellence and relentless development.
The third focus, tools and technology, has three foundation stones:
1. Adopt technology to fit your people and your process.
2. Use simple and visual means of communication to unify your organization.
3. Use standardization tools to provide organizational learning from program to program.

70

12 Challenges
12.1 Introduction
While the field of Knowledge Management has long been studied by scholars of several
disciplines, there remain significant challenges for the future. These challenges reside in
both theoretical and conceptual studies as well as practice and application. Change will be
omnipresent – requiring organizations to make incremental or continuous improvements, and
breakthrough or “game-changing” advances. The question is: What are the contributions
that Knowledge Management will make as a field of study and a relevant practice (Dierkes,
Berthoin Antal, Child, & Nonaka, 2003).
According to Reinhardt, Bornemann, Pawlowsky and Schneider (2003), "With knowledge
as one of the most important resources today. . . management obviously should attempt
to identify, generate, deploy, and develop knowledge" (p. 794). The concept of knowledge
management and the degree to which its value is outpacing the tangible assets of companies
has become an issue of concern for many organizations and managers. "Human capital is
seen as a company's total workforce and its knowledge about the business...It is seen as
crucial for marshaling the company's assets, both tangible and intangible" (Reinhardt, et
al., 2003, p. 796).
The theoretical/conceptual challenge lies in the lack of common definition of Knowledge
Management. There exists widespread variation in how scholars define it. Like the field
of Leadership, there needs to be further study and dialogue on what defines Knowledge
Management. It is only from that common understanding that the field itself will flourish
rather than becoming a popular management fad.

12.2 Manageability
Dierkes, Antal, Child, & Nonaka (2003) state, "If knowledge is an essential resource for
establishing competitive advantage, then management obviously should attempt to identify,
generate, deploy, and develop knowledge. Hence, managers need more knowledge about
knowledge and about how it can be managed, if it can be managed at all" (p. 794). In a
world replete with knowledge and information (often similar in meaning), or its possible
acquisition, what is often missing within organizations are the processes for dissemination.
As with most things, knowledge is only as good as its contextual applicability. Once
knowledge/information has been determined to be useful, and applicable to a particular
context, its manageability must be determined, i.e., how it should be dispensed, who should
be the recipients, what effects it will have on an organization and even the market in general.

71

Challenges

12.3 Technology
The initial challenge of knowledge management is synthesizing the information processing
technologies in your organization and the unique abilities of the people to allow the organization to survive and thrive on knowledge. Knowledge management is not just knowing
everything the organization knows. It is creating a synthesis between the people and the
information to the point that the whole is more than the sum of the parts. Bellinger (2004)
offered that “The value of knowledge management relates directly to the effectiveness with
which the managed knowledge enables the members of the organization to deal with today's
situations and effectively envision and create their future (p. 1).”
The technology dimension of Knowledge Management, while important, is not essentially
where knowledge actually resides. Technology can accumulate information, sort information,
communicate information, and do so at high rates of speed. But knowledge resides inside
human relationships and experiences. So, the challenge becomes one of building a culture
that values face-to-face human relationships, reflection, and sharing. Organizations must
challenge themselves to engage as many people as possible in the experiences, such that the
organization learns to the depth and breadth that will sustain its growth in knowledge and
ultimately its survival.

12.4 The individual
The challenge of the individual versus the team in knowledge sharing is created by the
very culture and context in which it resides. In the western culture mindset Trompenaars
& Hampden-Turner wrote “our education system is based on accumulating knowledge
individually” (Goldsmith, Morgan, & Ogg, 2004, p. 14). This form of defining working
culture is antithetical to a social structure that believes and embraces knowledge sharing
and management without having to accrue personal gain. This challenge presents itself in
many ways within corporate America because those who prescribe to it limit our ability to
work more effectively together and share intellectual capital.
According to Grant (1996), the major challenge of knowledge management is in the process
of capture and integration. In order to be successful, an organization must first concentrate
on changing the mindset of its followers. The goal in using knowledge management is to
aid them in the performance of their duties. Knowledge management challenges that were
once focused on financial aspects are now facing the challenges of measuring human and
intellectual value too. It can assisted by human language technology (Maybury, missing
retrieval date). The technology can include but is not limited to "retrieval, extraction,
summarization, and presentation/generation" (Maybury, missing retrieval date, p. 1). Not
only is this technology meant to enhance access, but also to enhance interactions between
people by improving knowledge awareness.

12.5 Culture
Knowledge Management, likewise, must have practical application to organizations – human
organizations. The tools, databases, and technological aids are not themselves Knowledge

72

Flexibility & change
Management. Knowledge and learning come from people and their relationships with each
other and their experiences. The real challenge, therefore, comes in the form of developing a
culture that embraces learning, sharing, changing, and improving, all through the collective
intelligence and knowledge of people.
Kluge et al. (2001) tell us that their examination of a variety of companies revealed that
many of them had attempted to implement knowledge management efforts but failed due
the the lack of an appropriate cultural context that would “create and nurture reciprocal
trust, openness and cooperation” (p. 25). They maintain that employees must be enthused
with a thirst for knowledge and that many failures in this arena are the result of top down
efforts to “push” information. Push approaches can often be identified by management’s
reference to information technology initiatives. The authors maintain that push is easy; the
challenge is in creating the pull – the desire for the knowledge among the employees.

12.6 Flexibility & change
“. . . The availability of information is changing everything. . . and it is creating the greatest
mass empowerment of all time” (Wheatley, 2004, p. 53). In this world of constant change,
the organizations that learn how to be smart, quick, agile, and responsive are the ones
that will survive long into the future. Organizations, though, are not machines. They are
made up of people who need time to experience, reflect, and learn. Likewise, knowledge
is not something that can be quantified and it is far more complex in that it is derived
out of human relationships and experiences. This, then becomes the greatest challenge of
Knowledge Management – the organization’s ability to embrace, grow, and attend to the
human dimension (Wheatley, 2004).

12.7 Shared leadership
One of the greatest challenges of knowledge management is the assurance that knowledge
will prevail by ensuring that knowledge workers are given “voice” – sometimes referred to as
shared leadership. Goldsmith (2004) defines knowledge workers “as people who know more
about what they are doing than their managers do [and adds that] while many knowledge
workers have years of education and experience in training for their positions, they often
have little training in how to effectively influence upper management” (Goldsmith, et al.,
2004, p. 19).
Goldsmith et al. (2004) quoting Peter Drucker provides an explanation for this lack of
influence when he says, “The great majority of people tend to focus downward. They are
occupied with efforts rather than results” (p. 19). In reality this concept might be taken
further – suggesting that the answer lies not in focusing on efforts or results, but rather
focusing on shared purpose. The responsibility for having “voice” within an organization
does not necessarily rest with a perception of permission from upper management but with
courageous followership. Ira Challef (2003), author of The Courageous Follower: Standing
Up To & For Our Leaders, states that shared leadership has its limits when given a top-down
approach. Instead, he purports that both the follower and leader share a common purpose
and that the “loyalty of each is to the purpose and to helping each other stay true to that

73

Challenges
purpose” (Chaleff, 2003, p. 17) – something that can only be done holistically, by giving
knowledge workers “voice” within the organization.

12.8 Building blocks
Garvin (1993) points to five building blocks that reflect some solid challenges to knowledge
management:
1. Systematic problem solving.
2. Experimentation with new approaches.
3. Learning from one’s own experience and past history.
4. Learning from the experiences and best practices of others.
5. Transferring knowledge quickly and efficiently throughout the organization.
These five building blocks need to function in harmony and balance with one another.
Effective knowledge management can be increased as systems and procedures are developed
to address and improve each of these five foundational stones. The challenge facing the
organization comes in maintaining the dynamic nature of the interrelationship of these five
areas of knowledge management. Garvin (1993) supplies three suggestions for addressing the
first building block of systematic problem solving. First is reliance on the scientific method
(hypothesis testing) rather than on guesswork when it comes to problem solving. Second,
decision making should be based on data, not assumptions (fact-based management). And
third, use simple statistical tools (charts, diagrams) to organize and communicate data.

12.9 Overcoming knowledge management challenges
Knowledge management can improve an organization’s ability to achieve development results.
In its most basic form, knowledge management is all about converting the available raw data
into understandable information. This information is then placed in a reusable repository for
the benefit of any future need based on similar kinds of experiences. Knowledge management
contributes towards streamlining the ideas, problems, projects and deployment in light of
organizational goals driving towards productivity.
Goldsmith, Morgan, & Ogg (2004) suggest the idea "of knowledge management is fundamentally flawed-it involves neither knowledge nor management and therefore cannot be
expected to succeed" (p. 39). Rather, they suggest that the real focus should be upon
“the intellectual capital” that workers possess. This creates a wide misunderstanding of the
purpose and context of sharing that intellectual capital. Far beyond facts stored in memories
of individuals, groups, or computers, intellectual capital deals with applied expertise gained
through understanding and experience. Effron continues suggesting by illustration that best
practices for hiring new workers may not be knowledge or facts easily gathered and stored.
Often, a talented human resources or other organizational leader may possess significant
skills and insights not learnable via a book or computer file. He suggests that learning from
such individuals can be an important learned and shared intellectual capital.

74

Case studies & workplace examples

12.10 Case studies & workplace examples
One of the greatest challenges in organizing KM is desire and motivation. Without people
within the company or organization having the motivation or vision for sharing information,
they shut down. Without the vision of why KM is important, people are not willing to give.
Another problem comes from the organization itself. If it is not willing to change it turns
on those that try to initiate it. We have been trained that knowledge is power. To give up
that power is antithetical to building our own importance verses the best interests of the
organization. I experienced this from the only company that I was released from. I was
invited to succeed elsewhere because I had too much initiative. In trying to share knowledge
I initiated change within a company that did not want to change. In the end, change did
not occur, KM was challenged, and I had to find a new job.
Within the Center for Life Calling and Leadership, there is a disconnect between knowledge
acquisition (research and curriculum development) and its dissemination with the organization as a whole. Leadership has decided that there must be intentionality between knowledge
acquisition and its dissemination. This is being accomplished through personnel assigned
to develop programming designed to integrate Life Calling into academia and student life.
Life Calling knowledge has been embraced conceptually, but the next stage is to integrate
this knowledge throughout the entire organization to positively affect the lives of individual
students, whether it is in the classroom or in residence life.
At Medical Protective, the reality of virtual teams in the organization posed a significant
threat in the area of shared learning/knowledge management. In order to overcome this
obstacle, information managers and organizational leaders determined that the use of
technology would have to be leveraged to bridge the gap in connecting these teams to
eachother. Simple technologies such as shared network drives were used to maintain training
material and commonly used forms and documents to keep the teams aligned. After
mastering the simple technologies, Medical Protective then moved to more complex systems
such as imaged filing programs, virtual telephony services, and web-based mainframes, so
that teams were connected, despite their logistical distances.the knowledge management is
more

75

13 Processes
According to Rumizen (2002), "knowledge management is a systematic process by which
knowledge needed for an organisation to succeed is created, captured, shared and leveraged."
For this reason, knowledge management involves leadership establishing processes, also
defined as activities or initiatives, to help organizations adapt to an ever changing environment
(National Electronic Library for Health, 2005). Successful knowledge management depends on
processes that enhance individual and organizational ability, motivations, and opportunities
to learn, gain knowledge, and perform in a manner that delivers positive business results.
Organizational processes that focus on these three attributes will lead to an effective
“management” of knowledge (Argote, McEvily, & Reagans, 2003). Rewards and other
motivational incentives are keys to the knowledge management process. Argote, et al. (2003)
have noted that members of an organization are unlikely to share insights and ideas within
the organization if they are not rewarded for the knowledge sharing. They point to the
impact of social rewards as being just as important as monetary rewards. A strong social
culture within an organization can promote the transfer of knowledge. Within the midst of
this strong culture there is a development of a desire for social cohesion and genuine spirit
of reciprocity. Argote, et al. point to a less altruistic and a more egocentric motivation for
knowledge sharing within an organization with a strong social culture. Often the employee
is willing to transfer knowledge in order to protect their own social standing. Demonstrating
uncooperative behavior or attitudes will damage one’s reputation and so to afford this social
and professional risk, knowledge sharing increases.
In the global and technological environment, the challenge exists to move from an organizational mindset that suggests that knowledge is for the few on the top echelon to an
understanding that knowledge once held by the few is available to the masses. Goldsmith,
Morgan, and Ogg (2004) contend, "The old days of "continous improvement" seem as leisurely
as a picnic from the past. In this chaotic and complex twenty-first century, the pace of
evolution has entered warp speed, and those who can't learn, adapt, and change from moment
to moment simply won't survive" (p. 54). The need to rethink the process of knowledge
management even in mega-organizations is of paramount importance. Goldsmith, et al.
(2004) further contend, "We're trying to manage something-knowledge-that is inherently
invisible, incapable of being quantified, and borne in relationships, not statistics" (p. 56).
The time to understand knowledge management from a multi-directional perspective has
come. Goldsmith, et al. says, "Our most important work is to pay serious attention to what
we always want to ignore: the Italic texthuman dimension" (p. 57).
According to Nonaka (1998), "Understanding knowledge creation as a process of making tacit
knowledge explicit--a matter of metaphors, analogies, and models--has direct implications
for how a company designs its organization and defines managerial roles and responsibilities
within it" (p. 36). Nanaka states that this is accomplished within Japanese companies
through redundancy, "the conscious overlapping of company information, business activities,
and managerial responsibilities" (p. 36). As a process, redundancy can become a medium

77

Processes
that assists in the management of knowledge within an organization. Though to many
western managers redundancy may conjure up mental images of "unnecessary duplication
and waste" (p. 36), it can assist in the area of employee expectancy, alleviating unnecessary
assumptions and confusion.
Creating opportunities for individuals to create, retain, and transfer knowledge can be
managed through employee development processes. For example, placing individuals in
situations where they can gain new experiences, or share learning from a prior experience
will enable knowledge management. Many companies have processes to intentionally move
personnel across the organization (across units, regions, functions, etc.) for the purpose
of transferring knowledge as well as building learning capability and agility within the
individuals.
Ability, while innate, can also be increased through effective training processes and experiences. Training in analogical reasoning, for example, will increase an individual’s ability
to transfer knowledge between tasks, assignments, or reporting units, thereby spreading
knowledge further across the organization.
Recognition and reward processes and systems can also influence the knowledge management
process. Members of an organization, who are recognized and rewarded for knowledge
transfer are more likely to engage in such sharing of knowledge, especially if it is integrated
into the performance management process and will influence their standing or reputation in
a positive manner.
Drawing upon Wheatley’s (1999) reference to a system as “a set of processes that are made
visible in temporary structures” (p. 23), we might deduce that organizational learning as a system process, is manifested or made known by the visible temporary structures of
behavioral patterns, rhythms, and relationships. In other words, the organization is a “living
system” –one that uniquely takes form through “fundamentally similar conditions” that other
organizations encounter: "...self...shared meaning...[and] networks of relationships...[resulting
in] information [that] is noticed, interpreted, [and] transformed” (Wheatley & Kellner-Rogers,
1999, p. 81) into knowledge. Thus, according to Wheatley (2004), knowledge management
cannot be proficiently processed independent of “creat[ive] work that is meaningful, leaders
that are trustworthy, and organizations that foster everyone’s contribution and support by
giving the staff time to think and reflect together” (Goldsmith, et al., 2004, p. 63).
The shear volume of information today also presents a process problem. Wheatley describes
what creates enormous possibilities for KM,“world wide web has created an environment
that is transparent, volatile, sensitive to the least disturbance, and choked with rumors,
misinformation, truths, and passions” (Trompenaars & Hampden-Turner, 2004, p. 53). The
list includes the belief that organizations are a machine, only materials and numbers are real,
you can only manage what you can measure, and technology is the best solution. The efforts
are ultimately an attempt to make knowledge manageable. Something one can keep track of,
keep inventory of, and procure for sale to another who wants it. To manage something you
must have some kind of an understanding of it and an ability to control it to some degree.
This reasoning leads to the list mentioned above by Wheatley as well as similar lists made
by other KM leaders.
What facilitates KM? Wheatley’s list says that humans create knowledge, and it’s natural
to create and share that knowledge, everyone is a knowledge worker, and people choose to
share their knowledge. Another process issue is attaining or gathering knowledge. That

78

Case studies & workplace examples
knowledge exists throughout any given organization, but the ability to inventory or tap
into that knowledge is difficult. Wheatley writes that “we must recognize that knowledge
is everywhere in the organization, but we won’t have access to it until, and only when,
we create work that is meaningful, leaders that are trustworthy, and organizations that
foster everyone’s contribution and support by giving staff time to think and reflect together”
(Trompenaars & Hampden-Turner, 2004, p. 63).
Effron (2004), asserts that given the definition of knowledge as “the fact or condition of
knowing something with familiarity gained through experience or association”, it is “impossible to acquire “knowledge” without either experiencing something yourself or interacting
with someone else who has” (p. 40). Knowledge Management is not synonymous with IT
systems and processes. Rather knowledge resides in the experiences of people in different
contexts. With regard to Knowledge Management, the aim of an organization is to work
within business processes that create, and transfer knowledge throughout the organization.
If knowledge is created and transferred via human experiences then these business processes
must encompass an understanding of how people learn and transfer their knowledge; that is
the business processes must emphasize person-to-person contact (Effron, 2004).
Examples of business processes that will lead to effective knowledge management are:
• The setting of goals and objective – be realistic and recognize the limitations of data
mining and information gathering. Make the increase of organizational knowledge a
stated and specific goal for the all.
• Employee retention – HR processes should focus on what it takes to retain employees
who hold key knowledge. Provide opportunities that are developmental, have purpose,
and have a high impact on business performance. Compensate such employees above
typical market rates.
• Employee development processes – pairing experts (what some companies call “Oak Trees”)
and apprentices provide opportunities for employees with differing levels of knowledge to
work together and increase the organizational knowledge. These relationships allow for a
true exchange of knowledge through a human relationship and experience.
• Organized networking and annual conferences – these provide forums for face-to-face
interaction and knowledge sharing and can lead to effective organizational knowledge
management.
• Accountability – line management, not just IT or HR, should be held accountable
for knowledge management. They should be held accountable for management of the
human resources and organizational knowledge. They do this through the above business
processes of employee development (experiences, developmental assignments, etc.).
In the process of KM there must be significant steps taken to eliminate any barriers that
may get in the way of becoming or increasing the ability to be a learning organization.
Cummings challenged our intentionality for to effectively help the processes of KM within
an organization there must be intentional efforts to remove barriers that would inhibit ideas,
talent, and money from getting to the point of best use (Trompenaars & Hampden-Turner,
2004).
Managers and leaders play in important role in the success of knowledge management
in their organization. James Robertson (2005) introduces ten key principles to ensure
that information management activities are effective and successful. These focus on the

79

Processes
organizational and cultural changes required to drive improvements forward. Those principles
are:
• Recognise (and manage) complexity
• Focus on adoption
• Deliver tangible & visible benefits
• Prioritise according to business needs
• Take a journey of a thousand steps
• Provide strong leadership
• Mitigate risks
• Communicate extensively
• Aim to deliver a seamless user experience
• Choose the first project very carefully
The practical value of KM is in what it is able to impact, how it impacts, and how well it
impacts. The line between KM and business is through the processes of business. KM's
biggest impact on business may be in its ability to improve processes and their performance
(Nichols, 2000). It is suggested that the changing of processes should take into consideration
the role KM plays in this process. In turn, the information that is needed to make decisions
to make changes must be identified and well as determining the effects those decisions will
generate.
An organization that wishes to begin to use Knowledge Management must begin by specifying
specific processes. These processes must be supported by technological resources and must
facilitate the sharing of information about problems and solutions, improvement suggestions
and information concerning best practices practiced by other organizations. Organizations
that follow this plan will develop a framework that catalogues, uses and integrates the
knowledge used by individuals as organizational knowledge for driving innovation and
organizational change (Hyde & Mitchell, 2000).
Hyde and Mitchell (2000) offer six strategies for developing knowledge management processes
within organizations:
1. Define a KM business case. What levels of knowledge and innovation will your agency
need to stay ahead of your "environment" and be "competitive?" (Do not start until
you can prove you need it.)
2. Baseline your intellectual capital. Knowledge is an intangible asset, but human capital
is not--measure current and projected workforce capabilities, your HR investments,
and expected return on investment. (Get HR involved from the outset.)
3. Make sure your senior executives "get it." Collaboration and knowledge sharing begin
at the top, not at the bottom. Top management has to see how KM will affect
performance and why it is critical for innovation and change. (Make sure the top dogs
are eating the same food.)
4. Build KM from the bottom up and across. What's most important about any KM program or process is its ability to facilitate knowledge exchange among those individuals
closest to the work, to the customers, and to the processes. KM must be an enabling
process that captures both best practices and new ideas while promoting access.
5. Balance external and internal. The value of your KM program is multiplied by its
reach--it needs to connect to other agencies, customers, and stakeholders. (Think in
terms of strategic alliances.)

80

Case studies & workplace examples
6. Think technology last and "chunk" your investments. What products will you need
to support your first level of KM development (allocate 75 percent of your KM IT
budget). Save 25 percent for building your technology strategy to support future KM
phases or new investments. (Think in terms of weeks and avoid all long-term systems
projects like the plague.) (p. 57)
Andrews and Delahaye (2000) found that factors at the individual level greatly influence
knowledge processes. These included a person’s perceptions of approachability, credibility
and trustworthiness, which directly influenced knowledge importing and knowledge sharing.
Researchers discovered that scientists in a bio-medical consortium actively filtered knowledge
importing by deciding whom they would ask for information, whom they would allow to give
them input, and with whom they would share their own knowledge. They made decisions
based upon what they felt their co-workers would do with the sensitive information. In each
case the scientists made a judgment of co-workers as to their perceived trustworthiness.
Knowledge management’s importance in organizations affects their competitiveness and the
bottom line in significant ways. Ogg and Cummings suggest, “There are three important
things that can be leveraged in large companies to help take advantage of being a big
organization, money, talent, and ideas” (Goldsmith, et al. (2004), p. 103). Managing
knowledge and intellectual capital increasingly grows as the critical of these three components
that organizations need to align and use as leverage to foster improvement from within
against stiffening competition. The processes necessary to align and create increased leverage
against the competition. Larger organizations can struggle to overcome significant barriers
to discover, organize, and utilize what Ogg and Cummings call a marketplace of ideas (cf. p.
104). Overcoming barriers and hindrances to sharing and utilizing great ideas takes discipline
and cultural values in which new ideas are readily shared, honored, and implemented.
Ogg and Cummings further suggest that fostering an organizational culture that values new
ideas necessitates that meetings become places where ideas are shared, appreciated, and
implemented in timely fashion. Additionally, infrastructure must connect people in trust
relationship with a context where meaningful ideas are shared. Technology and data storage
are inadequate to facilitate this kind of transference of new ideas.

13.1 Case studies & workplace examples
The process of managing knowledge is somewhat a misnomer. More often than not, what a
company really desires to do is capture knowledge because managed knowledge is subject
to mismanagement. One very simple process for capturing knowledge is known as “the
wisdom of the crowds” - as was written about by James Surowiecki in a book by the
same title. A more recent example of this is the famous television show, Who Wants to
be a Millionaire?, where a contestant is given a single opportunity to ask the audience
for their knowledgeable response to a particular question. Historically, this method of
knowledge capture has been relegated to situations where factual resolve is sought (i.e., a
single right answer). There are two important points to keep in mind when considering the
use of this methodology: 1) individuals making up the crowd do not usually communicate
with one another concerning their individual wisdom of the subject matter and 2) “the
group's guess will not be better than that of every single person in the group each time”
(http://www.randomhouse.com/features/wisdomofcrowds/excerpt.html).

81

Processes
Information technology provides a number of tools that facilitate the free sharing of knowledge
among co-workers and team members. Web collaboration tools that allow team members
to collaborate on line through the posting of relevant background information, calendars,
task lists an similar documents are particularly powerful. They are particularly useful when
members use them to post work in progress documents for review and use by others. The
versioning feature of many of these allows all the participants to review documents, make
comments and provide feedback. Chat and discussion areas also permit the free flow of
knowledge and information.
Microsoft's Sharepoint Server has been particularly valuable when used with firms working
on major planning projects. Participants scattered around the world are able to quickly
provide and share knowledge with one another in a fashion that would be cumbersome in
any other fashion.
Some years ago, Caterpillar Inc. recognized that a wealth of knowledge was contained in
the minds of engineers throughout the company who knew what had been successful and
what designs and practices had not been. This knowledge was frequently not available to
engineers in other parts of the far flung company who would unknowingly use designs that
had been less than successful elsewhere. In addition, much of the knowledge was perishable
as it was lost to the company when engineers retired.
Simultaneously, Caterpillar was implementing a system which would record, categorize,
analyze and report failure trends by application, type of equipment, subsystem, component
and type of failure from data gleaned from all warranty claims and all dealer service orders
worldwide in near real time. The original aim was to speed the recognition of required
product improvements to increase customer satisfaction and reduce warranty cost. It was
quickly realized that providing this type of information to engineers designing new products
would permit them to understand the historical failure modes of all parts, components and
systems and, therefore, to avoid repeating previous mistakes.
The Center for Life Calling and Leadership is a learning organization within the larger
organization of Indiana Wesleyan University (IWU). The Center seeks to learn how to best
meet the needs of IWU students, both students with pre-declared majors and leadership
majors/minors. The process (Developmental Model)that has been developed through research
focuses on each year of the college student's educational process. There are six stages on
the Life Calling Developmental Model: (1) The Pre-Stage issue is entrance transition; (2)
The first year stage is exploration; (3) The second year stage is connection; (4) The third
year stage is interaction; (5) The fourth year stage is anticipation; (6) Following their exit
from college, graduates now begin to implement what has been learned during the college
experience in their Post-Stage life. According to Millard (2004), it was projected that
students would progress developmentally throughout their educational process and increase
in self-directedness. Millard states:
One of the more eye-opening findings we have made is that this is not necessarily true.
We found self-directedness increasing until the end of the 3rd year and then suddenly,
with the anticipation and apprehension of life after college, there was a distinct regression
from self- directedness and a greater demand for supportive intervention. The 4th year
stage may be just as difficult as the 1st year stage. We also suspect that as we continue
to develop this model that we are going to see multiple regressions correlated to various
issues that occur throughout the college experience. Instead of gradually disengaging in

82

Case studies & workplace examples
our life calling support at our Center, we may find it a case of multiple refocusing of
emphases and efforts (p. 4).

83

14 Leadership
Leadership ultimately is an interaction or relationship between the leader and the led.
Knowledge Management (KM), as Wheatley points out, is a process that requires that
investment and relationship to exist on a deeper level of motivation (Trompenaars &
Hampden-Turner, 2004). To effectively understand how to lead learning organizations the
leader must understand what Garvin (1993) calls the three M’s. They are management,
meaning, and measurement. By effectively leading in these categories a leader can learn
to manage KM. Ultimately the three M’s are created and managed by ideas. Cummings
challenged this by saying, “Leaders are idea brokers that enable the exchange of ideas to
benefit their organization” (Cummings, Trompenaars & Hampden-Turner, 2004). This
exchange of ideas is part of meaning and measurement, the ability to procure new knowledge
and then integrate that into the framework of the organization. The overall mission of a
leader in the world of KM is to learn how to guide the internal marketplace within their
organization. By doing this, the leader creates an organization that is a learning team
dedicated to meaning, management, and measurement within KM.
The understanding of the three M’s will be largely determined by one perspective on
organizational learning. Ortenblad (2002) suggests two basic perspectives that might lead
in two distinct paths for leaders to consider. A futuristic perspective would conceptualize
individuals as agents of learning for the organization; the organization provides a positive
learning culture and climate for the individual; the knowledge gained by the individual
is stored outside the individual in the organizational memory. Ortenblad suggests that a
second perspective, an interpretive perspective, is becoming a dominant paradigm. Reality
is seen as a subjective phenomenon; knowledge is viewed as context dependent; learning is a
social practice, taking place between individuals; knowledge cannot be stored because it is
determined by the situation.
To understand the meaning, management and measurement of learning organizations is
a difficult task. The interpretive perspective places this task into the shifting sands of
relativism and contextualization. Relativism makes measurement almost impossible because
the norms are in constant flux. If the situation or context is the determining factor for
knowledge, then learning is not based on the foundation of truth but on the environment.
The implications of such a perspective are widespread including business ethics and cultural
morality. The bandwagon of this popular paradigm should not be jumped upon too quickly.
The most important thing leadership can do in ensuring the success of knowledge management
in their organization is selecting a Chief Knowledge Officer (CKO). The CKO is the
organization's expert on knowledge management and integration. According to Bontis
(2002), CKOs are responsible for:
1. Promoting stability in an ever-changing environment.
2. Provide the timely delivery of products/services.
3. Fostering organizational synergy by sharing resources and knowledge.

85

Leadership
4. Ensure the feasibility of specialization.
In addition, in order for CKOs to be effective, they must understand how to implement
technology is an enabler for capturing, storing, and sharing knowledge, as well as aligning it
with the values of the organization. Therefore, leadership should candidates for CKO who
are enthusiastic, idealist, creative, resourceful.
As a leadership skill, knowledge, according to Northouse (2004), "is inextricably related
to the application and implementation of problem-solving skills in organizations" (p. 43).
Mumford, Zaccaro, and Harding, et al. (2000), as cited by Northouse, state that knowledge
impacts a leaders ability to determine complex organizational problems and to develop a
solution. "Knowledge refers to the accumulation of information and the mental structures
used to organize that information" (p. 43). This type of mental structure is called a schema,
simply a mental diagram used to assimilate information into useable knowledge. Once a
leader formulates information into knowledge, individuals are more inclined to follow based
the leaders expertise. In previous eras, information/knowledge was considered a power base.
According to Greenberg and Baron (2003), information power has become a lesser power due
to technology and the availability of information to more people than ever before. In the past,
information was reserved for those who held top positions, using information/knowledge
for their benefit and allowing that information to be distributed only on a need-to-know
basis, or even in a biased manner. In a culture saturated with information/knowledge, it
is imperative that leaders use information/knowledge for the benefit of followers and the
organization as a whole and not for power accumulation.
As a result of their research, Kluge et al. (2001) tell us that knowledge management presents
unique leadership challenges. “From a leadership perspective, knowledge management has
been viewed more like a craft and less like a science. Because of the very nature of knowledge,
it is difficult for managers to predict what measures can really improve performance, and
how to encourage and guide knowledge flows within an organization (p. 191). The chief
executive, they say, must assume the role of promoting knowledge management throughout
the enterprise. He or she must set the tone for the organization and demonstrate that
knowledge, and its management, are taken seriously. In fact, according to some experts, if
the senior leadership of an organization is not able to adopt and embrace a KM program, it
is far more likely to fail than to succeed (Rosenburg, 2004). Having a dynamic personality
or being the ‘charismatic leader’ is no longer a viable leadership model for executives to rely
upon. Leaders within organizations must be able to learn and demonstrate competency.
Those people being led desire a person who not only frames a compelling vision, but also
can provide evidence that they have the knowledge and insight from which the vision is
derived. In short, knowledge and learning have become part and parcel to ‘leadership’.
Bolt and Brassard (2004) articulate this point by identifying those characteristics of effective
CEOs that support their learning and knowledge management. Here are some of the most
important attributes that they identified (Bolt & Brassard, 2004, pp. 162-163):
• They have a desire to learn: They integrate learning in all that they do and try to pull
knowledge from every situation.
• They have an open and curious mind: They seek out people who think differently or
might provide a different perspective.
• They show humility: They are willing, in fact eager, to learn from their mistakes. They
do not have to ‘know it all’ and respect people who share that value.

86

Case studies & workplace examples
• They make their learning public: Feedback is important. Taking the time to publicly
seek input and letting people know that they are working on learning more about an
issue or topic.
• They tolerate risk: Mistakes are important as learning tools. People need to learn from
their mistakes, but must not shy away from risk for fear of making a mistake. They
also understand that learning absolutely needs to occur at a faster rate than the rate of
change within the organization.
• They walk the talk: They pay it more than lip service; they fund and dedicate resources
to learning, through good times and bad.
McCollum (1998) states that there are three fundamental tasks that leaders face: “creating
strategies to adapt [the] organization to the environment, building a structure that is capable
of implementing [the organization’s] strategy, and building the capacity of the members of
[the] organization” (Spears, 1998, p. 338). It does not take a stretch of the imagination to
understand that each of these fundamental tasks requires ongoing organizational learning in
an environment of knowledge management - both explicit and tacit, and best understood
through the modes operandi of shared communication. But where and how do leaders begin
facing these tasks? Heil & Alepin (2004) state that it will require most leaders to “rethink
their leadership...in order to lead authentically...not only [for the purpose of] build[ing] more
effective, more human organizations, but...to enrich the lives of every person. . . ” (Goldsmith,
2004, pp. 158-159).
According to John Kotter there are eight steps to transform an organization through
leadership. These eight steps are: "1. Establish a sense of urgency, 2. Form a powerful
guiding coalition, 3. Create a vision, 4. Communicate the vision, 5.Empower others to act
on the vision, 6. Plan and create short-term wins, 7. Consolidate improvements and produce
still more change, 8. Institutionalize new approaches" (Kotter, 2003)
Leadership and Knowledge Management (KM) intermingle the vision and influence of
leadership with the available knowledge base within the organization. When effective
leadership elicits and draws upon the myriads of experience, wisdom, understanding, and
knowledge inherent in the work force in synergistic fashion creating shared vision, the
organization sits like a space shuttle ready begging for launch. In the context of a rapidly
changing world and an increasingly competitive marketplace, successful organizations of
today and tomorrow must harness and align all its potential and knowledge. Therefore,
Goldsmith, et al. (2004) suggest, "Nothing is more important to the success of knowledge
management initiative than the support of leaders and the visibility of KM role models.
Generally speaking, the higher up in the organization these role models are the better" (p.
9). 243).
Yogesh Malgotra says, "Knowledge Management refers to the critical issues of organizational
adaptation, survival and competence against discontinuous environmental change. Essentially it embodies organizational processes that seek synergistic combination of data and
information processing capacity of information technologies, and the creative and innovative
capacity of human beings." http://www.brint.org/managementfirst.html (Retrieved
May 13, 2006). Mark Effron (Goldsmith, Morgan, & Ogg, 2004) contends that “the sheer
concept of knowledge management is fundamentally flawed -- it involves neither knowledge
nor management and therefore cannot be expected to succeed” (p. 39). Instead, he suggests
we must “begin to focus on helping organizations truly share the intellectual capital their
workers possess” (p. 39).

87

Leadership
But does leadership always have to come from the top down? Patricia Wallington (2002)
poses the thought that leadership skills can be found at all levels of an organization. Lower
level employees can—and should—exhibit leadership to influence those at the top of the
organization. Before doing so, however, the individual should consider how to be most
effective when attempting to lead from below.
Wallington (2002) lays out the following steps in determining the right time and place to
lead from below:
1. Cultural Permission – Assess what your corporate culture supports or allows.
2. Prepare the Way – Develop a relationship with key senior leaders.
3. Pick Your Spots – Not every issue is a candidate for leadership from below.
4. Judge Not – Try not to be judgmental about leadership.
5. Grow Your Own Leadership – While you work on influencing the senior leadership of
your company, set the stage for your own development.
How might one successfully lead and draw upon the un-mined gold of intellectual capital
and harness it to pull the wagon of the organization to a new day? Morgan (Goldsmith,
Morgan, & Ogg, 2004) believes that the past leadership assets of superior knowledge and
technical expertise alone cannot create a flourishing organization. Technology’s explosion
and overabundance of information availability creates demand for a better type of leadership. Competitive advantage today means sharper and finer lines of work, teamwork, and
“investment in human capital” (p. 136). Beyond effective use of human resources, we must
draw the best from the best leaders in our organizations. Retraining successful leaders
from yesterday becomes a key challenge to leadership in a learning organization concerned
with KM. Morgan suggests that developing human potential and capital must earn the
trust of leaders through integrity and building meaningful relationships. Their “forward
looking vision” (p. 138) must be compelling and inspiring. This integrity and vision must
be disseminated and carried throughout the organizational culture and embodied by top
executives. In addition, the organization and leaders must attract and retain top talent and
deploy them for greatest return. In further consideration of leadership's intense involvement
in successful KM, Goldsmith, et al. (2004) also suggests, "If you can't get leaders on board,
your KM initiative may be doomed before it gets started. On the other hand, when leaders
at all levels (supervisors, managers, and executives) use the KM system, they encourage
others to do the same" (p. 243). As suggested by the very word, leaders need to take the
lead in practicing appropriate and successful KM.

14.1 Case studies & workplace examples
Leading KM is a daunting task, especially when you are leading from the middle. Only
a few lead at the top in organizations, most of us find ourselves leading from the middle.
We influence those above us and below us in any way we can. One of the ways I have
experienced leading KM from the middle is by providing the first step and championing the
partnership for KM within the organization. As a leader over my department I initiated
KM within it first. After championing the initial effort we then offered positive help to other
departments. Without anything to gain we invested into other's creating bridges that one
day will come back around. By leading with what was in our hands, we invested into the
whole of the organization without immediate personal benefit.

88

Case studies & workplace examples
As the Center for Life Calling and Leadership seeks to propagate itself within the university
(IWU) as a whole, one of the difficulties that remains is effectively promoting and integrating
Life Calling knowledge within other university departments and helping them utilize that
knowledge to better meet the needs of their respective students. Each year, the Center
hosts a workshop targeting other departments in an attempt to educate and facilitate open
discussion that equips these individuals (faculty and staff) with tools to assist students
and/or the understanding of our services and how that becomes applicable to their ability
to assist students in their educational journey. Presently, the Center is in an exploratory
phase seeking ways to better integrate Life Calling knowledge more effectively into other
university departments.
Empowerment of employees plays a critical role in leading knowledge management in an
organization. Employees must know that they have a personal responsibility for contributing
to the overall knowledge of the organization. As leader of a team of 25 customer service
associates, we took the image of empowerment to heart and allowed the team to participate
in owning, refining, and implementing their own knowledge management database. Although
I, as leader, laid the initial framework and the objective for the project, the team was given
ownership of their own piece of the tool, to ensure that they could contribute and share
their knowledge with the entire team. By allowing the team to play an integral role in the
establishment of our knowledge database, they were more comfortable in using it and taking
ownership of updating it as processes changed along the way.

89

15 Change
Knowledge that is acquired, stored, and dispensed without having any affect on the organization should, perhaps, be called ‘trivia’. For knowledge to actually be meaningful it needs to
induce change. This is not to imply that all change is derived from knowledge (any person
who has ever been associated with an organization knows better than that), but it is to say
that knowledge, when acted upon can induce change that can have consequential impact on
an organization. Perhaps, then, the real legacy of any ‘knowledge management’ program or
policy is the significance of the changes these initiatives bring about.
It was Charles Darwin who said, "It's not the strongest species that survive, nor the
most intelligent, but the most responsive to change". Understanding this phrase forces
organizations in any industry to look closely at the way change can impact their business.
Any large-scale change, however, requires the organization to confront the issue of culture.
This can be a daunting task. Culture is that invisible and often complex system of beliefs
and practices that determines how people act in organizations is fraught with difficulty.
Timothy Galpin (1996) gave 10 cultural components to consider when implementing change:
Rules and Policies
Eliminate rules and policies that hinder the change and create new ones that reinforce the
desired way of operating. Develop and document new SOP’s.
Goals and Measurement
Develop goals and measurements that reinforce the desired changes.
Customs and Norms
Replace old ways of doing things that reinforce the old ways with new customs and norms.
E.g. replace written reports with face-to-face meetings.
Training
Again replace training that reinforces the old way of doing things with new training.
Develop experiential training that provides real time, hands on experiences with new
processes and procedures.
Ceremonies and Events
Put in place ceremonies and events that reinforce the new ways. Recognise individual and
team contributions to making the changes work.
Management Behaviours
Publicly recognise and reward managers who change by linking promotion and pay to the
desired behaviours. Do not promote or pay increases to managers who do not come on
board.

91

Change
Rewards and Recognition
Make rewards specific to the change goals that have been set. Ensure that the performance
management system recognises and rewards the desired ways of operating and does not
simply reinforce the old ways. For example, a performance management system that
measures only individual behaviour will undermine any attempts to inculcate a culture of
teamwork.
Communications
Deliver communications in new ways to show commitment to change. Use multiple channels
to deliver consistent messages at all stages during the transition, before, during and after.
Physical environment
Make sure the physical environment reflects the change. If knowledge and information
sharing is your gaol, get people out of offices and into open, shared areas. If you want them
to talk to their customers, create ‘virtual’ offices so that your people are encouraged to
work outside the office with customers.
Organizational structure
Make sure that structure reinforces the operational changes. Combine overlapping divisions;
re-organize around customers as opposed to functions.
Garvin (1993) defines a learning organization as “an organization skilled at creating, acquiring,
and transforming knowledge, and at modifying its behavior to reflect new knowledge and
insights” (p. 80). If change is not the result of creating, gaining, and sharing knowledge then
“learning” is fairly meaningless. Innovation is merely creative imagination unless it results in
a transformation of reality. Yukl (2002) states, "Organizational learning involves acquiring
new knowledge, either by discovering it or by imitating the best practices of others" (p. 295).
Yukl (2002) goes on to add that organizational learning describes organizations that utilize
acquired knowledge to become more effective. This effectiveness can be realized through the
change process resulting from acquired knowledge. What is important for an organization is
the ability to implement the acquired knowledge into progressive change rather than acquire
knowledge and never use it. Yukl again states, "New knowledge is of little value unless it is
used. Some organizations are very successful at discovering knowledge, but fail to apply it
effectively" (p. 295). One of the ways that effective application can be realized is through
competition. As organizations are competitively driven to reach new heights (goals), they
are forced to explore, discover, and change based on the value of the knowledge acquired.
Goldsmith, et al. (2004) suggest, "Changing the way people work...is tough work that is not
to be taken lightly. Research in organizational dynamics, diffusion of innovation, and change
suggest that failure to pay attention to prevailing attitudes, beliefs, and practices, even when
the benefits of a new way of doing things are totally obvious to all, invites disappointment if
not disaster" (p. 242). Therefore, close attention needs to be on the people affected by the
introduction of change which occurs when knowledge management is introduced or revised.
Goldsmith, et al. (2004) contend, "If your investment in knowledge management does not
include a corresponding investment in change management, you may be throwing more than
your financial investment down a rat hole" (p. 251). Therefore, human capital, change, and
knowledge are a three legged stool which must be used together to be successful.

92

Case studies & workplace examples
Powell (2004) correctly asserts that for knowledge to induce change, it must be acted upon.
Who acts on knowledge? People do, of course. This question and answer may seem silly, but
the truth of the matter is that for knowledge management to be effective in bringing about
change, people need to be engaged in the knowledge management process. If we accept
that people are integral to the knowledge management process we must also recognize that
there will be confusion and consternation about any process an organization introduces
to manage knowledge. This is not because people will dislike the concept of knowledge
management, rather because people will resist change in all of the various forms it takes.
Rosenburg (2004) points out that introducing a knowledge management program without
paying attention to the “prevailing attitudes, beliefs, and practices”, is recipe for failure,
even when everyone fully appreciates the benefits of such a program. He further recommends
that any organization considering implementing a knowledge management program consider
first the 12 “change management factors” (Rosenberg, 2004, p. 243). These are:
1. Leadership and role models: If the organizational leaders support the knowledge
management program, it has a much greater chance of success.
2. Success stories: By sharing success stories, buy-in can occur more easily.
3. Consequences and incentives: in essence, this is the cost-benefit analysis all of us go
through before we adopt any change. If knowledge management makes life easier and
people have incentives to engage in the knowledge management processes, they are
more likely to welcome the change.
4. Value proposition: Prepare specific and defendable propositions as to how knowledge
management will add lasting value to all parts of the organization. Rosenburg (2004)
adds that the greater the specificity, the more likely buy-in will occur.
5. . Level of participation: Engage those who will use the knowledge management system
to be a part of the design.
6. . Hassle: People must understand that though a knowledge management program may
be a hassle, it will ultimately save them time and effort.
7. Impossibility: Be prepared for the nay-sayers. Understand that their concerns may
be legitimate and may come from previous experience where similar initiatives have
failed. Engage these people to the extent possible.
8. Priorities: A knowledge management system will be far more likely to succeed if it
is perceived as being not only a high priority, but also as having a high likelihood of
success.
9. Fear of technology: Even though most people in today’s workforce are computer savvy
to some degree, there are still many people who fear new technology. Deploy new
technology used in the knowledge management system long before people have to start
using it. Give people time to learn and adapt to the new technology.
10. Sink-in time: Allow for some time to let the concept of knowledge management to ‘sinkin’. Avoid ‘springing’ a new knowledge management system on people. Communicate
early and often and consider offering one-on-one demonstrations.
11. Training: The most vital element of managing the change associated with implementing
any knowledge management program is the training program. Focusing on the user
experience and providing ample real-life scenarios will increase the effectiveness of the
training.
12. Ongoing support: Change management often begins and ends with the roll-out. Do
not let this happen! Provide ongoing support so that people feel as though they

93

Change
have ready-resource when it comes to training, technical support, or other knowledge
management related topics.
As stated above, if we accept that people are integral to the effectiveness of the knowledge
any organization possesses, then we must also accept that people play an equally important
role in the knowledge management process. If organizations are capable of navigating the
12 issues outlined above, they are far more likely to implement a knowledge management
program that acquire, store, and dispense knowledge that can have a beneficial impact on
the enterprise as a whole.

15.1 Communities of practice
According to Julian (2005), a Community of Practice (CoP) uses "systemic efforts to plan,
implement, and evaluate a broad range of interventions designed to address community
problems." The term community refers to a group of people having a common interest.
CoPs were first used by researchers with common interests to help negotiate and reflect on
practices relating to their particular field (Brown & Duguid, 1991; Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Most importantly, CoPs help members create change through collaboration, reflection, and
the sharing of lessons learned.

15.2 Storytelling
Powell (2004) states that organizations “still think too much in terms of changing people’s
behaviors and not enough in terms of tapping into the potential people have for doing
better, doing more, and getting smarter” (Goldsmith, et al., p. 232). What has been
misconstrued is the fact that people willingly change and tap into their potential when
the opportunity arises. This is especially true when an organization fosters engagement.
One simple and very powerful but often overlooked method of fostering engagement is
through storytelling. Storytelling in an organizational setting – similar to mankind’s
historical storytelling reference, is comprised of “myths, legends and sagas, represent[ing] a
collective and institutional memory system which informally passes on key knowledge and
communicates important values, beliefs and assumptions” (Vance, 1991, p. 52). In its truest
form, storytelling is the organizational culture incarnate. Thus, organizational storytelling
is an excellent means to quickly enculturate new employees but is also just as effective used
as a training means for other employees. Storytelling is a vicarious means of learning that
allows for “relating the stories of the experiences of others. . . mak[ing] much of the power of
experienced-based learning available to the inexperienced learner” (p. 54). Storytelling’s
power comes from the fact that it utilizes both cognitive and affective means to deliver the
message – a message that is “easy to remember” and capable to expand “multidimensional
meaning. . . .even in the most confusing [and complex] situation[s]” (Joensuu & Ilmola, 2005,
p. 1).

94

Location of expertise

15.3 Location of expertise
There must be a current change or shift in how we understand or what method we use
in knowledge management. All too often we try and regulate one or a few to manage
knowledge bases. Or we limit our understanding of knowledge management to merely
posting information in a stagnant arena without dialogue, explanation, or contextual
reference for deeper understanding. There must be a change in development to perceive
knowledge management as an ‘everyone’ issue. An organization should develop a think-tank
within itself that holds itself accountable and polices the very knowledge that is shared.
Organizations should also develop multiple platforms of interaction where knowledge is
shared through technology, written materials, and interaction within cyberspace and face
to face. Effron states that “knowledge cannot be stored in a database, only information
can”(Goldsmith, Morgan, & Ogg, 2004,p. 42). So this identifies the process of communicating
information, the missing element is the communal aspect and context of the knowledge.
Adding these variables creates a forum and environment for knowledge management.
The interest in knowledge management has been growing for years. Now the field continues
to change and grow as new uses are always being developed. According to an article by
David Skyrme, some of these changes are focused on globalization and a firms ability to bring
together the knowledge from across the globe instead of reinventing information. Knowledge
is power and money. Being able to personalize the service provided to customers is money
in the bank. In the area(s) of restructuring and downsizing, valuable knowledge can be lost
with the ending of employment, or be expensive to replace. The sharing of best practices
allows companies to take information from the success of others and develop their own best
practices. Lastly, the ability to apply knowledge allows companies to develop new and better
products thereby making more money.
Fuglsang and Sundbo (2005) suggest that there are three modes of innovation for organizations that cross the continuum from deterministic to free choice. The first is an
entrepreneurial value-based method where change is initiated by individual’s actions and
drive to create business. The second is a technology-based functional mode in which the
development of technology drives innovation. The third is a strategic reflexive mode in
which innovation results from interaction process of individuals and the organization’s set of
common values and goals. The strategic reflexive mode of innovation is the most effective
mode for change and innovation in knowledge management. This mode values the exchange
of information within the organization and filters this exchange through the core values of
the organization. Change in an organization is potentially destructive to the organization,
so it is imperative that the changes to both the organization and to knowledge management
within the organization be regulated by the process of knowledge management itself and the
values of the organization itself.
Knowledge management will drive the need for new information systems. Most existing
systems have been developed to serve the needs of operating personnel and management.
New, knowledge management systems must be capable of making comparisons, analyzing
trends and presenting both historical and current knowledge. More importantly, they must
permit the users to transform data into knowledge by analyzing and understanding patterns
and drawing conclusions. These systems must do more than present data, they must permit
the decisions makers to understand the information. (Thierauf, 1999)

95

Change
Daft (2005) provides an eight-stage model of planned organizational change developed by
John P. Kotter. Careful attention must be given to each stage because a critical mistake
and any stage could cause the process to fail. Stage One – establish a sense of urgency
that change is really needed. Stage Two – form a powerful guiding coalition. Stage Three –
develop a compelling vision and strategy. Stage Four – communicate the vision widely. Stage
Five – empower the employees to act on the vision. Stage Six – generate short-term wins.
Stage Seven – consolidate gains and create greater change. And Stage Eight – Institutionalize
changes in the organizational culture.

15.4 Case studies & workplace examples
Every set of case studies deserves one that fails. In failure we learn, grow, and keep believing
in change. In an effort to initiate KM within two organizations we initiated change. The
two organizations were a para-church organization that ministered to a college campus and
a local-church college ministry. The change initiative was created to combine our ministries
by creating a bridge from the para-church site to multiple local church experiences. Through
this we would exercise KM by uniting our efforts and experiences with college students. The
local-church moved their meeting times and changed focus to pointing students towards the
mid-week experience at the campus and the local church on the weekend. The bridges were
made, but over time they didn't last. What was learned through the process will enable
others to adapt and learn when the next opportunity arises for change. These change efforts
will stimulate new methods that enable KM to be possible.
What ultimate organizational goals would knowledge management and change affect?
Change dominates the focus of much of knowledge management, organizational behavior,
and organizational learning. Producing and developing increasingly efficient and effective
processes, products, or output of any kind is a driving force in the competitive marketplace
of business and nonprofit. Knowledge management and change uniquely and intentionally
must synchronize together for organizational improvement.
Burke (1992) proposes that the kind of change necessary to qualify as organizational
development must happen at the cultural level. It is not enough to modestly change
functions, or organize and communicate better. Real change in organization does not
happen until the culture changes. " For change in an organization to be OD it must (1)
respond to an actual and perceived need for change on the part of the client, (2) involve
the client in the planning and implementation of the change, and (3) lead to change in
the organization's culture" (p. 8-9). Hence, the most effective change takes place at the
core value and organizational culture levels. It is the norms and values which underlie
basic assumptions, beliefs, and behaviors. Changing these underlying values is the ultimate
goal of knowledge management and organizational development. This goes beyond “fixing
a problem or improving a procedure” . . . it means, “That some significant aspect of
an organization’s culture will never be the same” (p. 9). “It might be a change in the
organization’s management style, requiring new forms of exercising authority, which in turn
would lead to different conformity patterns, since new norms would be established, especially
in decision making” (p. 9).

96

Case studies & workplace examples
Examples of such a cultural change can be found within the automotive industry, as
manufacturers move toward a team-based culture. For real change to take place companies
and unions have had to work toward a new vision of beliefs (about the motivation and
skill of employees), values (where all employee input is valued), and behaviors (those that
recognize contributions and accept responsibilities). It has not been enough to simply write
new contracts and procedures. Rather, the leaders on both the union and management
sides have had to work collaboratively to make significant changes in our underlying culture.
Such changes have led to improvements in safety, quality, and productivity.
In the author’s local organization, a church, a cultural shift took place following a yearlong
ReFocus process. Organization-wide input into strengths, weaknesses, and needed challenges
played into significant shifts in decision-making, leadership, and responsibility taking among
members. A new board was organized to create shared vision and mutual support from
varied ministry leaders who took responsibility to plan, brainstorm, and collaborate on
special projects. In addition, cell groups were organized to deepen relationship development,
expand caregiving to more leaders and members of our church. These cell groups function
with measurable autonomy from the larger group and are able to address unique needs and
growth points in the members of the individual groups.
The Center for Life Calling and Leadership seeks to gain knowledge through internal and
external research that will assist students in the Life Calling exploration process. As the
Center continues to be on the cutting edge, the research conducted is not based on existing
models, but unfolds through observation, internal and external. Once the knowledge has
been articulated, changes can be made based on the knowledge gained and its effective
integration into the Life Calling program and into the classroom (LDR 150, Life Calling,
Work and Leadership). Acquired knowledge also assists in the validation process for the
Center. When new ventures are explored, and the implementation stage has waned, a
period of validation is experienced to ensure that invested resources are meeting or exceeding
expectations. If the new venture fails to meet expectations, expressed or implied, change is
likely to become the new organizational expectation.
David Skyrme Associates (2003) have collected a database of case studies that show examples
of organizations that have achieved significant benefits through knowledge management.
Some examples are:
• BP - by introducing virtual teamworking using videconferencing have speeded up the
solution of critical operation problems
• Hoffman La Roche - through its Right First Time programme has reduced the cost and
time to achieve regulatory approvals for new drugs.
• Dow Chemical - by focusing on the active management of its patent portfolio have
generated over $125 million in revenues from licensing and other ways of exploiting their
intangible assets.
• Texas Instruments - by sharing best practice between its semiconductor fabrication plants
saved the equivalent of investing in a new plant.
• Skandia Assurance - by developing new measures of intellectual capital and goaling their
managers on increasing its value have grown revenues much faster than their industry
average.
• Hewlett-Packard - by sharing expertise already in the company, but not known to their
development teams, now bring new products to market much faster than before.

97

16 References
Albert, M. (2005). Managing change: Creating a learning organization focused on quality.
Problems and Perspectives in Management 1, 47-54.
Altvater, E, & Mahnkopf, B. (1997). Grenzen der globalisierung: Ökonomie, ökologie und
politik in der weltgesellschaft. Münster: Westfalisches Dampfboot.
Amabile, T. M. (1998). How to kill creativity [Electronic version]. Harvard Business Review,
76(5), 76-87.
Anderson, C., & Maize, L. C. (2005). Educating the extended enterprise [Electronic version].
Chief Learning Officer, 4(12), 24-56.
Andrews, K. M., & Delahaye, B. L. (2000). Influences on knowledge processes in organizational learning: the psychosocial filter. Journal of Management Studies, 37(6), 22-38.
Angel, R. (2006). Putting an innovation culture into practice. Ivey Business Journal, 70(3),
1-5.
Argote, L., McEvily, B., & Reagans, R. (2003). Managing knowledge in organizations: An
integrative framework and review of emerging trends [Electronic version]. Management
Science, 49(4), 571-582.
Arlin, P. K. (1975). Cognitive development in adulthood: A fifth stage. Developmental
Psychology, 11, 602-606.
Arlin, P. K. (1984). Adolescent and adult thought: A structural interpretation. In M. L.
Commons, F. A. Richards, and C. Armon (Eds.), Beyond formal operations: Late adolescent
and adult cognitive development. New York: Praeger.
Balasubramanian, V. Organizational learning and informational systems. E-papyrus,Inc.
Retrieved on April 19, 2006, from http://www.e-papyrus.com/personal/orglrn.html.
Bellinger, G. (2004). Knowledge management: emerging perspectives.
systems-thinking.org/kmgmt/kmgmt.htm

http://www.

Berliner, D. The 100-year journey of educational psychology: from interest to disdain,to
respect for practice. Arizona State University. Retrieved from http://courses.ed.asu.
edu/berliner/readings/journey.htm
Berthoin Antal, A., Dierkes, M., Child, J., & Nonaka, I. (2003). Organizational learning
knowledge: Reflections on the dynamics of the field and challenges for the future. In M.
Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational learning
and knowledge (pp. 921-939). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Bethune, G., & Thuler, S. (1998). From worst to first: Behind the scenes of continental's
remarkable comeback. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

99

References
Bissell, A. N., & Lemons, P. P. (2006). A new method for assessing critical thinking in the
classroom [Electronic version]. BioScience, 56(1), 66-72.
Black, E. (1995). Behaviorism as a learning theory. Retrieved May 2, 2006, from http:
//129.7.160.115/inst5930/Behaviorism.html.
Bloland, H. G. (2005). Whatever happened to postmodernism in higher education?: No
requiem in the new millennium. Journal of Higher Education, 76(2), p. 121+.
Boerner, C. S., Macher, J. T., & Teece, D. J. (2003). A review and assessment of rorganizational learning in economic theories. In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka
(Eds.), Handbook of organizational learning and knowledge (pp. 89-117). New York: Oxford
University Press, Inc.
Bolt, J. F., & Brassard, C. (2004). Learning at the top: how CEOs set the tone for
the knowledge organization. In M. Goldsmith, H. Morgan & A. J. Ogg (Eds.), Leading
organizational learning: harnessing the power of knowledge (1st ed., pp. 161-174). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Boje, D., & Prieto, L. (2000). What is postmodern? Retrieved from the Postsomething? Story telling Organization. Retrieved on April 17,2006, from http://www.
horsesenseatwork.com/psl/pages/postmoderndefined.html.
Bontis, N. (2002). The rising star of the chief knowledge officer. Ivey Business Journal,
66(4), p. 20+.
Brookfield, S. (1986). Understanding and facilitating adult learning. San Francisco: JosseyBass.
Brookfield, S. (1987). Developing Critical Thinkers. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Brookfield, S. (1994). Tales from the dark side: A phenomenography of adult critical
reflection. Proceedings of the Adult Education Research Conference. Knoxville: University
of Tennessee.
Brown, J. S. & Duguid, P. (1991). Organizational learning and communities practice:
Toward a unified view of working, learning, and innovation. Organizational Science, 2, pp.
40-57.
Buchel, B., & Raub, S. (2003). Media choice and organizational learning. In M. Dierkes,
A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational learning and
knowledge (pp. 518-534). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Burke, W. W. (1992). Organizational development: A process of learning and changing (2nd
ed.). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Chaleff, I. (2003). The courageous follower: Standing up to & for our leaders. (2nd ed.).
San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
Cheetham, G., & Chivers, G. (2001). Part I - how professionals learn - the theory! Journal
of European Industrial Training, 25(5), 250.
Child, J. (2003). Learning through strategic alliances. In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal,
J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational leadership and knowledge (pp.
657-680). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.

100

Case studies & workplace examples
Child, J. & Heavens, S. J. (2003). The social constitution of organizations and its implications
for organizational learning. In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.),
Handbook of organizational leadership and knowledge (pp. 308-326). New York: Oxford
University Press, Inc.
Clark, S., & Mirabile, R. (2004). Knowledge mapping: An application model for organizations.
In M. Goldsmith, H. Morgan & A. J. Ogg (Eds.), Leading organizational learning (pp. 113120). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Collins, M. (1991). Adult education as vocation london. New York: Routledge.
Cohen, M.D., & Sproull, L. S. (1991). Editors' introduction. Organization Science, 2(1),
i-iii.
Coutu, D. (2002). The anxiety of learning. Harvard Business Review, March-April, 1-8.
Craven, A. (2005). An interview with Dr. Yogesh Malhotra. Retrieved on May 13, 2006,
from http://www.brint.org/managementfirst.html
Daft, R. L. & Lengel, R. H. (1984). Information richness: A new approach to managerial
behavior and organization design, in B. M. Staw and L.L. Cummings (eds.), Research in
Organization Behavior: An Annual Series of Analytical Essays and Critical Reviews (Vol.
6). Greenwich, Comm, pp. 191-233.
Daft, R. L. (2005). The leadership experience. (3rd ed.). Mason, OH: South-Western.
David Skyrme Associates (2003). Knowledge management: Making sense of an oxymoron.
Retrieved June 21, 2006, from http://www.skyrme.com/insights/22km.htm.
Dierkes, M., Berthoin Antal, A., Child, J., & Nonaka, I. (Eds.). (2003). Handbook of
organizational learning & knowledge. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Effron, M. S. (2004). Knowledge management involves neither knowledge nor management.
In M. Goldsmith, H. Morgan & A. J. Ogg (Eds.), Leading organizational learning: harnessing
the power of knowledge (1st ed., pp. 39-49). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
English, H. B. and English, A. C. (1958). A comprehensive dictionary of psychological and
psycho-analytical terms: A guide to usage. New York, NY: Longmans Green.
Foil, C. M. & Lyles, M. (1985). Organizational learning. Academy of Management Review,
10 (4), 803-813.
Fricke, W. (Ed.). (1997). Jahrbuch arbeit und technik: Globalisierung und institutionelle
reform. Bonn: Dietz.
Fuglsang, L. & Sundbo, J. (2005). The organizational innovation system: three modes.
Journal of Change Management, 5(3), p. 329-344.
Galpin, T. (1996, March). Connecting culture to organizational change. HR Magazine.
Retrieved June 21, 2006, from http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m3495/
is_n3_v41/ai_18251530.
Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple intelligences: The theory in practice. New York: Basic Books
Gardner, H. (1999). Multiple intelligences for the 21st century. New York: Basic Books.

101

References
Garvin, D. A. (1993). Building a learning organization [Electronic version]. Harvard Business
Review, 71(4),78-91.
Gigenrenzer, G. (2006). Follow the leader. Harvard Business Review. February, p. 58-59.
Goldsmith, M., Morgan, H., & Ogg, A. J. (Eds.). (2004). Leading learning organization:
Harnessing the power of knowledge. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Grant, R.M. (1996). Prospering in Dynamically-Competitive Environments: Organizational
Capability as Knowledge Integration. Organization Science (7),4, 375-387.
Greenberg, J., & Baron, R. A. (2003). Behavior in organizations: Understanding and
managing the human side of work. (8th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education,
Inc.
Griff, F. (2004). Dimensions of adult learning: Adult education and trainng in a global era.
Crows Nest, N.S.W.: Allen & Unwin.
Group of Lisbon (1995). Limits to competition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Gruber, H. E. (1973). Courage and cognitive growth in children and scientists. In M.
Schwebel and J. Ralph (Eds.), Piaget in the classroom. New York: Basic Books.
Hamel, G, & Prahald, C.K. (1994). Competing for the future. Harvard Business School
Press.
Hardy, C., Phillips, E., & Lawrence, T. B. (2003, March). Resources, knowledge and influence:
The organizational effects of interorganizational collaboration. Journal of Management
Studies, 400(2), 321-347. Retrieved on May 16, 2006, from Corporate ResourceNet database.
Hare, D., Howard, E., & Pope, M. (2005). Enhancing technology usein student teaching: A
case study. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 13(4), p. 573+.
Hilgard, E. R., & Bower, G. H. (1966). Theories of learning. New York: Appleton-CentruryCrosfts.
Holmqvist, M. (2003). The dynamic model of intra-and interorganizational learning. Look
smart. Retrieved on April 18, 2006, from http://www.find articles.com/p/articles/mi_m4339/is_1_24/ai_98595128/print.
Houle, C. (1980). Continuing learning in the professions. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Howells, J. & Wood, M. (Eds.) (1993). The globalisation of production and technology.
London: Belhaven.
Hyde, A., & Mitchell, K. (2000). Knowledge management: The nex big thing [Electronic
Version]. The Public Manager, 29(57). Retrieved on April 26, 2006, from http://www.
questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=5001786333.
Irwin, D. A., & Klenow, P. J. (1994). Learning by doing spillovers in the semiconductor
industry. Journal of Political Economics, 102, 1200-1227. As cited in Argote, L., McEvily,
B., & Reagans, R. (2003). Managing knowledge in organizations: an integrative framework
and review of emerging themes. Management Science, 49(4), 571-582.
Jarvis, P. (1987a). Adult learning in the social context. London: Croom Helm.

102

Case studies & workplace examples
Joensuu, E., & Ilmola, L. (2005, November 11). Storytelling. . . for strategic flexibility. . . for
change management. Retrieved on April 13, 2005, from the Fountain Park Ltd website:
http://www.fountainpark.com/pdf/White_Paper_Dec_8th.pdf.
Johnson, R. A. (1991). Owning your own shadow. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers.
Kapstein, E. B. (1996). Workers and the world economy. Foreign Affairs, 75(3), 16-37.
Kearsley, G. (1994). Explorations in learning & instruction: The theory into practice
database. [Online]. Retrieved from http://tip.psychology.org.
Kiely, T. (1993). The idea makers. Technology Review, 96(1), 32-40. Retrieved on February
28, 2006, from EBSCOhost Web Site: http://search.epnet.com/login.aspx?direct=
true&db-buh&an=9301210027&site=ehost
Kilgore, D. W. (2001). Critical and postmodern perspective on adult learning. New
Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 89, 53-61.
Klages, M. (2003). Postmodernism. [Electronic version]. Retrieved on April 30, 2006, from
http://www.colorado.edu/english/engl2012klages/pomo.html.
Kluge, J., Stein, W., Licht, T., Bendler, A., Elzenheimer, J., Hauschild, S., et al. (2001).
Knowledge unplugged : The Mckinsey & Company global survey on knowledge management
/. New York: Palgrave. Retrieved on April 18, 2006, from Questia database: http:
//www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=102571239
Knowles, M. S. (1968). Andragogy, not pedagogy. Adult Leadership, 16(10), 350-352, 386.
Knowles, M. S. (1980). The modern practice of adult education: From pedagogy to andragogy.
(2nd ed.) New York: Cambridge Books.
Kolb. D. A. & Fry, R. (1975) Toward an applied theory of experiential learning. In C.
Cooper (Ed.) Theories of Group Process, London: John Wiley.
Kotter, J. (2003) Winning at change. Retrieved from http://providersedge.com/kma/
km_leadership.htm
Landy, F. J., & Conte, J. M. (2004). Work in the 21st century: An introduction to industrial
and organizational psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Lei D., Slocum, W., & Pitts, R.A. (1997). Building cooperative advantage: Managing
strategic alliances to promote organizational learning. Journal of World Business 32(3),
203-223.
Levinthal, D. A. (1991). Organizational Adaptation And Environmental Selection- Interrelated Processes Of Change. Organization Science, 2, 140-145.
Levitt, B. & March, J. G. (1988). Organizational learning. Annual review of sociology, 14,
319-340.
Lewis, M. & Moultrie, J. (2005). The organizational innovation laboratory. Creativity and
Innovation Management, 14 (1), 73-83.

103

References
Liker, J. K., & Morgan, J. M. (2006). The Toyota way in services: the case of lean product
development [Electronic version]. Academy of Management Perspectives, 20(2), 5-20.
Lohman, M. C. (2005). A survey of factors influencing the engagement of two professional
groups in informal workplace learning activities. Human Resource Development Quarterly,
16(4), 501-527.
Macharzina, K., Oesterle, M., & Brodel, D. (2003). Learning in multinationals. In M.
Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational learning
and knowledge (pp. 631-656). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Maira, A. & Scott-Morgan, P. (1997). The accelerating organization: Embracing the human
face of change. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Maurer, R. (2004). One small step can change your life: The kaizen way. New York, NY:
Workman Publishing.
Maybury, M. Human language technologies for knowledge management: challenges and
opportunities. Information Technology Division. The MITRE corporation.
McConnell, D. & Zhao, J. (2004) Exploration and analysis of factors influencing
group learning. Networked Learning Conferance. Retrieved on April 18, 2006, from
http;//www.shef.ac.uk/nlc2004/proceedings/individual_papers/Zhao_McConnell.htm.
Merriam, S. B., & Caffarella, R. S. (1999). Learning in adulthood: A comprehensive guide.
(2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Merkens, H., Geppert, M., & Antal, D. (2003). Triggers of organizational learning during
the transformation process in Central European countries. In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin
Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational learning and knowledge
(pp. 242-263). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Microsoft Encarta. (2001). Microsoft Encarta college dictionary. New York, NY: St.
Martin’s Press.
Millard, B. (2004). Discovering a life calling: A purpose-guided approach to navigating
college transitions. Marion, IN: Indiana Wesleyan University.
Mohanan, K. P. Assessing quality of teaching in higher education. Centre for Development
of Teaching & Learning, 1-4. Retrieved on April 18, 2006, from http://www.cdtl.nus.edu.
sg/publications/assess/who.htm.
Muldur, U. & Petrella, R. (Eds.) (1994). Science and technology policy: The European
community and the globalization of technology and the economy. Luxembourg: Office for
Official Publications of the European Communities.
National Electronic Library for Health (2005). Specialist library: Knowledge management.
Retrieved May 30, 2006, from http://www.nelh.nhs.uk/knowledge_management/km2/
processes.asp
Neilson, G. L., & Pasternack, B. A. (2005). Results: Keep what's good, fix what's wrong and
unlock great performance. New York: Crown Business.
Nevis, E. C., DiBella, A. J., & Gould, J. M. (1995). Understanding Organizations as learning
systems. Sloan Management Review, 6(2), 73-85.

104

Case studies & workplace examples
Nickols, F. (2000). Knowledge management(KM)and process performance. Retrieved on
April 18, 2006, from http://home.att.net/~nickols/KM_and_processes.htm.
Nonaka, I. (1998) The knowledge creating company: Harvard Business Review on management. Boston: MA: Harvard Business School Publishing.
Northouse, P. G. (2004). Leadership: Theory and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Örtenblad, A. (2002). Organizational learning: A radical perspective. International Journal
of Management Reviews, 4(1), 87-100.
Pattison, S. (1999). A history of the adult distance education movement. Unpublished
Dissertation, Nova Southeastern University.
Pawlowsky, P., Forslin, J., & Reinhardt, R. (2003). Practices and tools of organizational
learning. In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of
organizational learning and knowledge (pp. 775-793). New York: Oxford University Press,
Inc.
Pegasus Communication. What is organizational learning? Retreived on April 18, 2006,
from http://www.thesytemsthinker.com/tstaboutol.html.
Prather, C. W. (2000). Keeping innovation alive after the consultants leave [Electronic
version]. Research Technology Management, 43(5), 17-22.
Random House, Inc. (2004). The wisdom of the crowds. (excerpt). Retrieved on April 24,
2006, from http://www.randomhouse.com/features/wisdomofcrowds/index.html.
Reinhardt, R., Bornemann, M., Pawlowsky, P., & Schneider, U. (2003). Intellectual capital
and knowledge management: Perspectives on measuring knowledge. In M. Dierkes, A.
Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational learning and
knowledge (pp. 794-820). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Robertson, J. (2005). 10 principles of effective information management. KM Column
(Nov 05). Retrieved June 21, 2006, from http://www.steptwo.com.au/papers/kmc_
effectiveim/index.html.
Robbins, S. P. (1998). Organizational behavior. (8th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Rosenberg, M. J. (2004). The role of change management in knowledge management. In M.
Goldsmith, H. Morgan & A. J. Ogg (Eds.), Leading organizational learning: harnessing the
power of knowledge (1st ed., pp. 241-253). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Ross, O. T. (2002). Self-directed learning in adulthood: a literature review. Retrieved on
April 28, 2006, from ERIC database. Morehead State University.
Rumizen, M. C. (2002). The complete idiot's guide knowledge management. Madison, WI:
CWL Publishing Enterprises.
Sadler, P. (2003). Leadership and organizational learning. In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin
Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational learning and knowledge (pp.
415-427). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.

105

References
Sambrook, S. & Stewart, J. (2000). Factors influencing learning in European learning
oriented organizations: issues for management. Journal of European Industrial Training,
24(2-4), 209-213.
Senge, P., Ross, R., Smith, B., Roberts, C., & Kleiner, A. (1994). The fifth discipline fieldbook:
Strategies and tools for building a learning organization. New York, NY: Currency/Doubleday.
Shallcross, D. J. (1975). Creativity: Everybody's business [Electronic version]. Personnel
and Guidance Journal, 51(9), 623-626.
Shipton, H., Dawson, J., West, M., & Patterson, M. (2002). Learning in manufacturing organizations: what factors predict effectiveness? Human Resource Development International,
5(1), 55-72.
Sitkin, S. B., Sutcliffe, K., & Barrios-Choplin, J. (1992). A dual-capacity model of communication media choice in organizations. Human Communication Research, 18, 563-98.
Skyrmes, D., Knowledge management: making sense of an oxymoron. Retrieved on April
19, 2006, from http://www.skyrme.com/insights/22km.htm.
Smith, Paul, http://theory.eserver.org/anthropology.html (Retrieved April 25, 2006)
Song, J., Almeida, P., & Wu, G. (2003) Learning by hiring: when is mobility more likely to
facilitate interfirm knowledge transfer? Management Science, 49(4), 351-365. As cited in
Argote, L., McEvily, B., & Reagans, R. (2003). Managing knowledge in organizations: an
integrative framework and review of emerging themes. Management Science, 49(4), 571-582.
Spears, L. C. (Ed.). (1998). Insights on leadership: Service, stewardship, spirit, and
servant-leadership. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Spillane, J. P. (2002). Local theories of teacher change: the pedagogy of district policies
and programs [Electronic version]. Teachers College Record, 104(3), 377-420.
Starbuck, W. H., & Hedberg, B. (2003). How organizations learn from success and failure.
In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational
leadership and knowledge (pp. 327-350). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Sternberg, R. J. (2003). Creative thinking in the classroom [Electronic version]. Scandinavian
Journal of Educational Research, 47(3), 325-338.
Stopford, J. M. (2003)Organizational learning as guided responses to market signals. In
M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational
leadership and knowledge (pp. 264-281). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Suh, T. (2002). Encouraged, motivated and learning oriented for working creatively and
successfully: A case of Korean workers in marketing communications [Electronic version].
Journal of Marketing Communications, 8(3), 135-147.
Tainio, R, Lilja, K., & Santalainen, T. J. (2003) In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child
& I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational leadership and knowledge (pp. 428-445).
New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Thierauf, R. (1999). Knowledge management systems for businesses. Retrieved April 26,
2006, from http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=102054312

106

Case studies & workplace examples
Thompson, L. (2003). Improving the creativity of organizational work groups [Electronic
version]. Academy of Management Executive, 17(1), 96-111.
Trompenaars, F., & Hampden-Turner, C. (2004). Five Dilemmas of Knowledge Management.
In M. Goldsmith, H. Howard & A.J. Ogg (Eds.), Leading organizational learning: Harnessing
the power of knowledge (pp. 13-17). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Vance, C. M. (1991). Formalising storytelling in organizations: A key agenda for the design
of training. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 4(3), 52-58. Retrieved on
March 30, 2006, from Business Source Premier database.
Ulrich, D. (1998). A new mandate for human resources. Harvard Business Review, 76(1),
124-134.
Verra de Cunha, J., Pina E Cunha, M., & Kamoche, K. (2002). Organizational improvisation.
New York: Routledge.
von Rosenstiel, L., & Koch, S. (2003). Change in socioeconomic values as a trigger of
organizational learning. In M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.),
Handbook of organizational learning and knowledge (pp. 198-220). New York: Oxford
University Press, Inc.
Wallington, P. (2002, October 15) Leadership from below: Tap into talent at all levels of
the organization. CIO Magazine. Retrieved June 21, 2006 from http://www.cio.com/
archive/101502/lead.html.
Watkins, K. and Marsick, V. (eds.) (1993). Sculpting the learning organization: Lessons in
the art and science of systematic change. San Fransisco: Jossey-Bass.
Weber, C., & Berthoin Antal, A. (2003). The role of time in organizational learning. In
M. Dierkes, A. Berthoin Antal, J. Child & I. Nonaka (Eds.), Handbook of organizational
learning and knowledge (pp. 351-368). New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Wheately, M. J. (1999). Leadership and the new science: Discovering order in a chaotic
world. (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
Wheately, M. J., & Kellner-Rogers (1999). A simpler way. San Francisco, CA: BerrettKoehler Publishers, Inc.
Wheatley, M. J. (2004). The real work of knowledge management. In M. Goldsmith, H.
Morgan & A. J. Ogg (Eds.), Leading organizational learning: harnessing the power of
knowledge (1st ed., pp. 53-63). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Weick, K.E. & Westley, F. (1996). Organizational learning: Affirming an oxymoron. In S.
Clegg, C. Hardy, and W. Nord (Eds.) Handbook of Organization Studies: 440- 458. London:
Sage.
Wilson, B.G. (1997). The postmodern paradigm. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Uzzi, B. (1996). The sources and consequences of embeddedness for the economic performance
of organizations: The network effect. American Sociological Review, 61, 674-698.
Uzzi, B. (1997). Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The paradox of
embeddedness. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 35-67.

107

References
Yi, J. (2005). Effective ways to foster learning [Electronic Version]. Performance Improvement, 44, 34-38. Retrieved on April 14, 2006.
Yukl, G. (2002) Leadership in organizations. (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Zellmer-Bruhn, M. E. (2003). Interupptive events and team knowledge acquisition. Management Science, 49(4), 514-528. As cited in Argote, L., McEvily, B., & Reagans, R. (2003).
Managing knowledge in organizations: an integrative framework and review of emerging
themes. Management Science, 49(4), 571-582.
Zemke, R. (2002). A pocket guide to useful learning theories [Electronic version]. Training,
39(9), 90-91.
http://web.cocc.edu/cbuell/theories/behaviorism.htm
http://tip.psychology.org/bruner.html
http://www.learning-theories.com/
http://business.nmsu.edu/~dboje/mpw.html
http://tip.psychology.org/knowles.html
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Wikiversity:School_of_Education/Educational_
Leadership

108

17 Contributors
Edits
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
3
1
1
1
2
19
2
1
5
4
8
1
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

User
Abigor1
Acipenser2
Adrignola3
Aestudil4
Ahemmeri5
Az15686
Chen857
Chen938
Cjbonk9
Dirk Hünniger10
Fishpi11
Graemeb196712
Hagindaz13
Haiying14
JenVan15
Jomegat16
Klseifert17
Michaelwayw218
Mike.lifeguard19
Moriokfutai20
Motaylor21

http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Abigor
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Acipenser
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Adrignola
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Aestudil
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Ahemmeri
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Az1568
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Chen85
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Chen93
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Cjbonk
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Dirk_H%C3%BCnniger
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Fishpi
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Graemeb1967
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Hagindaz
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Haiying
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:JenVan
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Jomegat
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Klseifert
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Michaelwayw2
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Mike.lifeguard
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Moriokfutai
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Motaylor

109

Contributors
1
3
1
5
1
6
1
1
2
2
7
1
1
1
2

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

110

Oline7322
Panic2k423
PurpleKiwi24
QuiteUnusual25
Rdunican26
Recent Runes27
Red4tribe28
T0y0d429
TheresaC30
TimNelson31
Wahsu32
Whiteknight33
Xania34
Yahtsai35
Yang36

http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Oline73
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Panic2k4
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:PurpleKiwi
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:QuiteUnusual
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Rdunican
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Recent_Runes
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Red4tribe
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:T0y0d4
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:TheresaC
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:TimNelson
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Wahsu
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Whiteknight
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Xania
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Yahtsai
http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=User:Yang

List of Figures
• GFDL: Gnu Free Documentation License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html
• cc-by-sa-3.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

http://

• cc-by-sa-2.5: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 2.5 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5/

http://

• cc-by-sa-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 2.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/

http://

• cc-by-sa-1.0: Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 1.0 License.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/1.0/

http://

• cc-by-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0/
• cc-by-2.0: Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en
• cc-by-2.5: Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.5/deed.en
• cc-by-3.0: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en
• GPL: GNU General Public License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.txt
• LGPL: GNU Lesser General Public License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.
html
• PD: This image is in the public domain.
• ATTR: The copyright holder of this file allows anyone to use it for any purpose,
provided that the copyright holder is properly attributed. Redistribution, derivative
work, commercial use, and all other use is permitted.
• EURO: This is the common (reverse) face of a euro coin. The copyright on the design
of the common face of the euro coins belongs to the European Commission. Authorised
is reproduction in a format without relief (drawings, paintings, films) provided they
are not detrimental to the image of the euro.
• LFK: Lizenz Freie Kunst. http://artlibre.org/licence/lal/de
• CFR: Copyright free use.

111

List of Figures
• EPL: Eclipse Public License. http://www.eclipse.org/org/documents/epl-v10.
php
Copies of the GPL, the LGPL as well as a GFDL are included in chapter Licenses37 . Please
note that images in the public domain do not require attribution. You may click on the
image numbers in the following table to open the webpage of the images in your webbrower.

37

112

Chapter 18 on page 115

List of Figures

113

18 Licenses
18.1 GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright © 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
<http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
it is not allowed. Preamble
The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft
license for software and other kinds of works.
The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed to take away your freedom
to share and change the works. By contrast, the
GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change all versions
of a program–to make sure it remains free software
for all its users. We, the Free Software Foundation,
use the GNU General Public License for most of our
software; it applies also to any other work released
this way by its authors. You can apply it to your
programs, too.
When we speak of free software, we are referring
to freedom, not price.
Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have
the freedom to distribute copies of free software
(and charge for them if you wish), that you receive
source code or can get it if you want it, that you
can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs, and that you know you can do these
things.
To protect your rights, we need to prevent others
from denying you these rights or asking you to surrender the rights. Therefore, you have certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it: responsibilities to respect
the freedom of others.
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must pass
on to the recipients the same freedoms that you received. You must make sure that they, too, receive
or can get the source code. And you must show
them these terms so they know their rights.
Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your
rights with two steps: (1) assert copyright on the
software, and (2) offer you this License giving you
legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify
it.
For the developers’ and authors’ protection, the
GPL clearly explains that there is no warranty for
this free software. For both users’ and authors’
sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be
marked as changed, so that their problems will not
be attributed erroneously to authors of previous
versions.
Some devices are designed to deny users access to
install or run modified versions of the software inside them, although the manufacturer can do so.
This is fundamentally incompatible with the aim
of protecting users’ freedom to change the software.
The systematic pattern of such abuse occurs in the
area of products for individuals to use, which is
precisely where it is most unacceptable. Therefore,
we have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the practice for those products. If such problems arise substantially in other domains, we stand
ready to extend this provision to those domains in
future versions of the GPL, as needed to protect
the freedom of users.
Finally, every program is threatened constantly by
software patents. States should not allow patents
to restrict development and use of software on
general-purpose computers, but in those that do,
we wish to avoid the special danger that patents
applied to a free program could make it effectively
proprietary. To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program nonfree.
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow. TERMS AND
CONDITIONS 0. Definitions.
“This License” refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public License.
“Copyright” also means copyright-like laws that apply to other kinds of works, such as semiconductor
masks.
“The Program” refers to any copyrightable work
licensed under this License. Each licensee is addressed as “you”. “Licensees” and “recipients” may
be individuals or organizations.
To “modify” a work means to copy from or adapt
all or part of the work in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the making of an exact
copy. The resulting work is called a “modified version” of the earlier work or a work “based on” the
earlier work.
A “covered work” means either the unmodified Program or a work based on the Program.
To “propagate” a work means to do anything with it
that, without permission, would make you directly
or secondarily liable for infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing it on a computer or modifying a private copy. Propagation includes copying, distribution (with or without modification), making available to the public, and in
some countries other activities as well.
To “convey” a work means any kind of propagation
that enables other parties to make or receive copies.
Mere interaction with a user through a computer

network, with no transfer of a copy, is not conveying.
An interactive user interface displays “Appropriate
Legal Notices” to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently visible feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and (2) tells
the user that there is no warranty for the work (except to the extent that warranties are provided),
that licensees may convey the work under this License, and how to view a copy of this License. If
the interface presents a list of user commands or
options, such as a menu, a prominent item in the
list meets this criterion. 1. Source Code.
The “source code” for a work means the preferred
form of the work for making modifications to it.
“Object code” means any non-source form of a
work.
A “Standard Interface” means an interface that either is an official standard defined by a recognized
standards body, or, in the case of interfaces specified for a particular programming language, one
that is widely used among developers working in
that language.
The “System Libraries” of an executable work include anything, other than the work as a whole,
that (a) is included in the normal form of packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of
that Major Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with that Major Component,
or to implement a Standard Interface for which an
implementation is available to the public in source
code form. A “Major Component”, in this context,
means a major essential component (kernel, window
system, and so on) of the specific operating system
(if any) on which the executable work runs, or a
compiler used to produce the work, or an object
code interpreter used to run it.
The “Corresponding Source” for a work in object
code form means all the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable work) run
the object code and to modify the work, including
scripts to control those activities. However, it does
not include the work’s System Libraries, or generalpurpose tools or generally available free programs
which are used unmodified in performing those activities but which are not part of the work. For
example, Corresponding Source includes interface
definition files associated with source files for the
work, and the source code for shared libraries and
dynamically linked subprograms that the work is
specifically designed to require, such as by intimate
data communication or control flow between those
subprograms and other parts of the work.
The Corresponding Source need not include anything that users can regenerate automatically from
other parts of the Corresponding Source.
The Corresponding Source for a work in source code
form is that same work. 2. Basic Permissions.
All rights granted under this License are granted
for the term of copyright on the Program, and are
irrevocable provided the stated conditions are met.
This License explicitly affirms your unlimited permission to run the unmodified Program. The output from running a covered work is covered by this
License only if the output, given its content, constitutes a covered work. This License acknowledges
your rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyright law.
You may make, run and propagate covered works
that you do not convey, without conditions so long
as your license otherwise remains in force. You may
convey covered works to others for the sole purpose
of having them make modifications exclusively for
you, or provide you with facilities for running those
works, provided that you comply with the terms
of this License in conveying all material for which
you do not control copyright. Those thus making or
running the covered works for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your direction and control, on terms that prohibit them from making any
copies of your copyrighted material outside their
relationship with you.
Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under the conditions stated below. Sublicensing is not allowed; section 10 makes it unnecessary. 3. Protecting Users’ Legal Rights From AntiCircumvention Law.
No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological measure under any applicable law
fulfilling obligations under article 11 of the WIPO
copyright treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, or
similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such measures.

You may charge any price or no price for each copy
that you convey, and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee. 5. Conveying Modified
Source Versions.
You may convey a work based on the Program, or
the modifications to produce it from the Program,
in the form of source code under the terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:
* a) The work must carry prominent notices stating
that you modified it, and giving a relevant date. *
b) The work must carry prominent notices stating
that it is released under this License and any conditions added under section 7. This requirement
modifies the requirement in section 4 to “keep intact all notices”. * c) You must license the entire
work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who
comes into possession of a copy. This License will
therefore apply, along with any applicable section 7
additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all
its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This
License gives no permission to license the work in
any other way, but it does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received it. * d) If
the work has interactive user interfaces, each must
display Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the
Program has interactive interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal Notices, your work need not
make them do so.
A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent works, which are not by their
nature extensions of the covered work, and which
are not combined with it such as to form a larger
program, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an “aggregate” if the compilation and its resulting copyright are not used to
limit the access or legal rights of the compilation’s
users beyond what the individual works permit. Inclusion of a covered work in an aggregate does not
cause this License to apply to the other parts of the
aggregate. 6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.
You may convey a covered work in object code form
under the terms of sections 4 and 5, provided that
you also convey the machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this License, in one
of these ways:
* a) Convey the object code in, or embodied in,
a physical product (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by the Corresponding
Source fixed on a durable physical medium customarily used for software interchange. * b) Convey the
object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
(including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by a written offer, valid for at least three
years and valid for as long as you offer spare parts
or customer support for that product model, to
give anyone who possesses the object code either
(1) a copy of the Corresponding Source for all the
software in the product that is covered by this License, on a durable physical medium customarily
used for software interchange, for a price no more
than your reasonable cost of physically performing
this conveying of source, or (2) access to copy the
Corresponding Source from a network server at no
charge. * c) Convey individual copies of the object
code with a copy of the written offer to provide
the Corresponding Source. This alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercially, and
only if you received the object code with such an offer, in accord with subsection 6b. * d) Convey the
object code by offering access from a designated
place (gratis or for a charge), and offer equivalent
access to the Corresponding Source in the same way
through the same place at no further charge. You
need not require recipients to copy the Corresponding Source along with the object code. If the place
to copy the object code is a network server, the Corresponding Source may be on a different server (operated by you or a third party) that supports equivalent copying facilities, provided you maintain clear
directions next to the object code saying where to
find the Corresponding Source. Regardless of what
server hosts the Corresponding Source, you remain
obligated to ensure that it is available for as long
as needed to satisfy these requirements. * e) Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission,
provided you inform other peers where the object
code and Corresponding Source of the work are being offered to the general public at no charge under
subsection 6d.
A separable portion of the object code, whose
source code is excluded from the Corresponding
Source as a System Library, need not be included
in conveying the object code work.

When you convey a covered work, you waive any
legal power to forbid circumvention of technological measures to the extent such circumvention is effected by exercising rights under this License with
respect to the covered work, and you disclaim any
intention to limit operation or modification of the
work as a means of enforcing, against the work’s
users, your or third parties’ legal rights to forbid
circumvention of technological measures. 4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.

A “User Product” is either (1) a “consumer product”, which means any tangible personal property
which is normally used for personal, family, or
household purposes, or (2) anything designed or
sold for incorporation into a dwelling. In determining whether a product is a consumer product,
doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of coverage. For a particular product received by a particular user, “normally used” refers to a typical or
common use of that class of product, regardless of
the status of the particular user or of the way in
which the particular user actually uses, or expects
or is expected to use, the product. A product is a
consumer product regardless of whether the product has substantial commercial, industrial or nonconsumer uses, unless such uses represent the only
significant mode of use of the product.

You may convey verbatim copies of the Program’s
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately
publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice; keep intact all notices stating that this License
and any non-permissive terms added in accord with
section 7 apply to the code; keep intact all notices
of the absence of any warranty; and give all recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.

“Installation Information” for a User Product
means any methods, procedures, authorization
keys, or other information required to install and
execute modified versions of a covered work in that
User Product from a modified version of its Corresponding Source. The information must suffice to
ensure that the continued functioning of the modified object code is in no case prevented or interfered
with solely because modification has been made.

If you convey an object code work under this section in, or with, or specifically for use in, a User
Product, and the conveying occurs as part of a
transaction in which the right of possession and
use of the User Product is transferred to the recipient in perpetuity or for a fixed term (regardless of how the transaction is characterized), the
Corresponding Source conveyed under this section
must be accompanied by the Installation Information. But this requirement does not apply if neither
you nor any third party retains the ability to install
modified object code on the User Product (for example, the work has been installed in ROM).
The requirement to provide Installation Information does not include a requirement to continue to
provide support service, warranty, or updates for a
work that has been modified or installed by the recipient, or for the User Product in which it has been
modified or installed. Access to a network may be
denied when the modification itself materially and
adversely affects the operation of the network or
violates the rules and protocols for communication
across the network.
Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation
Information provided, in accord with this section
must be in a format that is publicly documented
(and with an implementation available to the public
in source code form), and must require no special
password or key for unpacking, reading or copying.
7. Additional Terms.
“Additional permissions” are terms that supplement
the terms of this License by making exceptions from
one or more of its conditions. Additional permissions that are applicable to the entire Program
shall be treated as though they were included in
this License, to the extent that they are valid under applicable law. If additional permissions apply
only to part of the Program, that part may be used
separately under those permissions, but the entire
Program remains governed by this License without
regard to the additional permissions.
When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may
at your option remove any additional permissions
from that copy, or from any part of it. (Additional
permissions may be written to require their own removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)
You may place additional permissions on material,
added by you to a covered work, for which you have
or can give appropriate copyright permission.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for material you add to a covered work, you
may (if authorized by the copyright holders of that
material) supplement the terms of this License with
terms:
* a) Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently from the terms of sections 15 and 16 of this
License; or * b) Requiring preservation of specified
reasonable legal notices or author attributions in
that material or in the Appropriate Legal Notices
displayed by works containing it; or * c) Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that material,
or requiring that modified versions of such material
be marked in reasonable ways as different from the
original version; or * d) Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of licensors or authors of
the material; or * e) Declining to grant rights under
trademark law for use of some trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or * f) Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of that material
by anyone who conveys the material (or modified
versions of it) with contractual assumptions of liability to the recipient, for any liability that these
contractual assumptions directly impose on those
licensors and authors.
All other non-permissive additional terms are considered “further restrictions” within the meaning of
section 10. If the Program as you received it, or any
part of it, contains a notice stating that it is governed by this License along with a term that is a
further restriction, you may remove that term. If a
license document contains a further restriction but
permits relicensing or conveying under this License,
you may add to a covered work material governed
by the terms of that license document, provided
that the further restriction does not survive such
relicensing or conveying.
If you add terms to a covered work in accord with
this section, you must place, in the relevant source
files, a statement of the additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indicating where to
find the applicable terms.
Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive,
may be stated in the form of a separately written
license, or stated as exceptions; the above requirements apply either way. 8. Termination.
You may not propagate or modify a covered work
except as expressly provided under this License.
Any attempt otherwise to propagate or modify it is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights
under this License (including any patent licenses
granted under the third paragraph of section 11).
However, if you cease all violation of this License,
then your license from a particular copyright holder
is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the
copyright holder explicitly and finally terminates
your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
holder fails to notify you of the violation by some
reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright
holder is reinstated permanently if the copyright
holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have received
notice of violation of this License (for any work)

from that copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the
notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does
not terminate the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under this License.
If your rights have been terminated and not permanently reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new
licenses for the same material under section 10. 9.
Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.
You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or run a copy of the Program. Ancillary propagation of a covered work occurring solely
as a consequence of using peer-to-peer transmission
to receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance. However, nothing other than this License
grants you permission to propagate or modify any
covered work. These actions infringe copyright if
you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or propagating a covered work, you indicate
your acceptance of this License to do so. 10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.
Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient
automatically receives a license from the original
licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work,
subject to this License. You are not responsible
for enforcing compliance by third parties with this
License.
An “entity transaction” is a transaction transferring control of an organization, or substantially all
assets of one, or subdividing an organization, or
merging organizations. If propagation of a covered work results from an entity transaction, each
party to that transaction who receives a copy of the
work also receives whatever licenses to the work the
party’s predecessor in interest had or could give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to possession of the Corresponding Source of the work from
the predecessor in interest, if the predecessor has it
or can get it with reasonable efforts.
You may not impose any further restrictions on the
exercise of the rights granted or affirmed under this
License. For example, you may not impose a license
fee, royalty, or other charge for exercise of rights
granted under this License, and you may not initiate litigation (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that any patent claim
is infringed by making, using, selling, offering for
sale, or importing the Program or any portion of it.
11. Patents.
A “contributor” is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this License of the Program or a
work on which the Program is based. The work
thus licensed is called the contributor’s “contributor version”.
A contributor’s “essential patent claims” are all
patent claims owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acquired or hereafter acquired,
that would be infringed by some manner, permitted by this License, of making, using, or selling its
contributor version, but do not include claims that
would be infringed only as a consequence of further
modification of the contributor version. For purposes of this definition, “control” includes the right
to grant patent sublicenses in a manner consistent
with the requirements of this License.
Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free patent license under the contributor’s essential patent claims, to make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise run, modify and
propagate the contents of its contributor version.

In the following three paragraphs, a “patent license” is any express agreement or commitment,
however denominated, not to enforce a patent (such
as an express permission to practice a patent or
covenant not to sue for patent infringement). To
“grant” such a patent license to a party means to
make such an agreement or commitment not to enforce a patent against the party.
If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying
on a patent license, and the Corresponding Source
of the work is not available for anyone to copy,
free of charge and under the terms of this License,
through a publicly available network server or other
readily accessible means, then you must either (1)
cause the Corresponding Source to be so available,
or (2) arrange to deprive yourself of the benefit
of the patent license for this particular work, or
(3) arrange, in a manner consistent with the requirements of this License, to extend the patent
license to downstream recipients. “Knowingly relying” means you have actual knowledge that, but
for the patent license, your conveying the covered
work in a country, or your recipient’s use of the covered work in a country, would infringe one or more
identifiable patents in that country that you have
reason to believe are valid.
If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction or arrangement, you convey, or propagate
by procuring conveyance of, a covered work, and
grant a patent license to some of the parties receiving the covered work authorizing them to use,
propagate, modify or convey a specific copy of the
covered work, then the patent license you grant is
automatically extended to all recipients of the covered work and works based on it.
A patent license is “discriminatory” if it does not include within the scope of its coverage, prohibits the
exercise of, or is conditioned on the non-exercise
of one or more of the rights that are specifically
granted under this License. You may not convey a
covered work if you are a party to an arrangement
with a third party that is in the business of distributing software, under which you make payment
to the third party based on the extent of your activity of conveying the work, and under which the
third party grants, to any of the parties who would
receive the covered work from you, a discriminatory patent license (a) in connection with copies
of the covered work conveyed by you (or copies
made from those copies), or (b) primarily for and in
connection with specific products or compilations
that contain the covered work, unless you entered
into that arrangement, or that patent license was
granted, prior to 28 March 2007.
Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or limiting any implied license or other defenses to infringement that may otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law. 12. No
Surrender of Others’ Freedom.
If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court
order, agreement or otherwise) that contradict the
conditions of this License, they do not excuse you
from the conditions of this License. If you cannot
convey a covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and any
other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence
you may not convey it at all. For example, if you
agree to terms that obligate you to collect a royalty for further conveying from those to whom you
convey the Program, the only way you could satisfy
both those terms and this License would be to refrain entirely from conveying the Program. 13. Use
with the GNU Affero General Public License.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have permission to link or combine any
covered work with a work licensed under version
3 of the GNU Affero General Public License into
a single combined work, and to convey the resulting work. The terms of this License will continue
to apply to the part which is the covered work, but
the special requirements of the GNU Affero General
Public License, section 13, concerning interaction
through a network will apply to the combination
as such. 14. Revised Versions of this License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised
and/or new versions of the GNU General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be
similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU General Public License
“or any later version” applies to it, you have the
option of following the terms and conditions either
of that numbered version or of any later version
published by the Free Software Foundation. If the
Program does not specify a version number of the
GNU General Public License, you may choose any
version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.
If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide
which future versions of the GNU General Public
License can be used, that proxy’s public statement
of acceptance of a version permanently authorizes
you to choose that version for the Program.
Later license versions may give you additional or
different permissions. However, no additional obligations are imposed on any author or copyright
holder as a result of your choosing to follow a later
version. 15. Disclaimer of Warranty.
THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE
STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE
PROGRAM “AS IS” WITHOUT WARRANTY OF
ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND
PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH
YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.
16. Limitation of Liability.
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY
OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES AND/OR CONVEYS THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE,
BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE
THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED
BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE
OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY
OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER
OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF
THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.
If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided above cannot be given local legal ef-

fect according to their terms, reviewing courts shall
apply local law that most closely approximates an
absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection
with the Program, unless a warranty or assumption
of liability accompanies a copy of the Program in
return for a fee.
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
If you develop a new program, and you want it to
be of the greatest possible use to the public, the
best way to achieve this is to make it free software
which everyone can redistribute and change under
these terms.
To do so, attach the following notices to the program. It is safest to attach them to the start of
each source file to most effectively state the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the “copyright” line and a pointer to where the full
notice is found.
<one line to give the program’s name and a brief
idea of what it does.> Copyright (C) <year>
<name of author>
This program is free software: you can redistribute
it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU
General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
This program is distributed in the hope that
it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public
License for more details.
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program. If not,
see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.
If the program does terminal interaction, make it
output a short notice like this when it starts in an
interactive mode:
<program> Copyright (C) <year> <name of author> This program comes with ABSOLUTELY
NO WARRANTY; for details type ‘show w’. This is
free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
under certain conditions; type ‘show c’ for details.
The hypothetical commands ‘show w’ and ‘show c’
should show the appropriate parts of the General
Public License. Of course, your program’s commands might be different; for a GUI interface, you
would use an “about box”.
You should also get your employer (if you work
as a programmer) or school, if any, to sign a
“copyright disclaimer” for the program, if necessary.
For more information on this, and
how to apply and follow the GNU GPL, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
The GNU General Public License does not permit
incorporating your program into proprietary programs. If your program is a subroutine library, you
may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the library. If this is
what you want to do, use the GNU Lesser General
Public License instead of this License. But first,
please read <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/whynot-lgpl.html>.

18.2 GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.3, 3 November 2008
Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
it is not allowed. 0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual,
textbook, or other functional and useful document
"free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
with or without modifying it, either commercially
or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered
responsible for modifications made by others.
This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means
that derivative works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements
the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it
for manuals for free software, because free software
needs free documentation: a free program should
come with manuals providing the same freedoms
that the software does. But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether
it is published as a printed book. We recommend
this License principally for works whose purpose is
instruction or reference. 1. APPLICABILITY AND
DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work,
in any medium, that contains a notice placed by the
copyright holder saying it can be distributed under
the terms of this License. Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that work under the conditions stated
herein. The "Document", below, refers to any such
manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You accept the
license if you copy, modify or distribute the work
in a way requiring permission under copyright law.
A "Modified Version" of the Document means any
work containing the Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
translated into another language.
A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a
front-matter section of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or

authors of the Document to the Document’s overall
subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook
of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be
a matter of historical connection with the subject
or with related matters, or of legal, commercial,
philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.
The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are designated, as being those of
Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the
Document is released under this License. If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary
then it is not allowed to be designated as Invariant.
The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections.
If the Document does not identify any Invariant
Sections then there are none.
The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text
that are listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover
Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is
released under this License. A Front-Cover Text
may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text
may be at most 25 words.
A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a
machine-readable copy, represented in a format
whose specification is available to the general public, that is suitable for revising the document
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for
images composed of pixels) generic paint programs
or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to text formatters. A copy
made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose
markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged
to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by
readers is not Transparent. An image format is not
Transparent if used for any substantial amount of
text. A copy that is not "Transparent" is called
"Opaque".
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent
copies include plain ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or
XML using a publicly available DTD, and standardconforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification. Examples of transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG.
Opaque formats include proprietary formats that
can be read and edited only by proprietary word
processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD
and/or processing tools are not generally available,
and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or

PDF produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.
The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the
title page itself, plus such following pages as are
needed to hold, legibly, the material this License
requires to appear in the title page. For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such,
"Title Page" means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work’s title, preceding the
beginning of the body of the text.
The "publisher" means any person or entity that
distributes copies of the Document to the public.
A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit
of the Document whose title either is precisely XYZ
or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that
translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ
stands for a specific section name mentioned below,
such as "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title"
of such a section when you modify the Document
means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers
next to the notice which states that this License
applies to the Document.
These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference
in this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other implication that these Warranty
Disclaimers may have is void and has no effect on
the meaning of this License. 2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any
medium, either commercially or noncommercially,
provided that this License, the copyright notices,
and the license notice saying this License applies to
the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that
you add no other conditions whatsoever to those
of this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept compensation in exchange for
copies. If you distribute a large enough number of
copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may publicly display
copies. 3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media
that commonly have printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document’s license notice requires Cover Texts, you

must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly
and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover
Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts
on the back cover. Both covers must also clearly
and legibly identify you as the publisher of these
copies. The front cover must present the full title
with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible. You may add other material on the covers
in addition. Copying with changes limited to the
covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put the first ones
listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual
cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the
Document numbering more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy
along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with
each Opaque copy a computer-network location
from which the general network-using public has
access to download using public-standard network
protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps,
when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in
quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will
remain thus accessible at the stated location until
at least one year after the last time you distribute
an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or
retailers) of that edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them
a chance to provide you with an updated version of
the Document. 4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of
the Document under the conditions of sections 2
and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the
Modified Version filling the role of the Document,
thus licensing distribution and modification of the
Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it.
In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:
* A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if
any) a title distinct from that of the Document,
and from those of previous versions (which should,
if there were any, be listed in the History section
of the Document). You may use the same title as
a previous version if the original publisher of that
version gives permission. * B. List on the Title

Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in
the Modified Version, together with at least five of
the principal authors of the Document (all of its
principal authors, if it has fewer than five), unless
they release you from this requirement. * C. State
on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
Modified Version, as the publisher. * D. Preserve
all the copyright notices of the Document. * E. Add
an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the other copyright notices. * F.
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a
license notice giving the public permission to use
the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below. *
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required Cover Texts given in
the Document’s license notice. * H. Include an unaltered copy of this License. * I. Preserve the section
Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to it
an item stating at least the title, year, new authors,
and publisher of the Modified Version as given on
the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating the title,
year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous
sentence. * J. Preserve the network location, if any,
given in the Document for public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given in the Document for previous
versions it was based on. These may be placed in
the "History" section. You may omit a network location for a work that was published at least four
years before the Document itself, or if the original
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
* K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements"
or "Dedications", Preserve the Title of the section,
and preserve in the section all the substance and
tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
and/or dedications given therein. * L. Preserve all
the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered
in their text and in their titles. Section numbers or
the equivalent are not considered part of the section
titles. * M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be included in the
Modified Version. * N. Do not retitle any existing
section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to conflict
in title with any Invariant Section. * O. Preserve
any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter
sections or appendices that qualify as Secondary
Sections and contain no material copied from the
Document, you may at your option designate some
or all of these sections as invariant. To do this, add
their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the
Modified Version’s license notice. These titles must
be distinct from any other section titles.
You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements",
provided it contains nothing but endorsements of
your Modified Version by various parties—for example, statements of peer review or that the text
has been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a
Front-Cover Text, and a passage of up to 25 words
as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover
Texts in the Modified Version. Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may
be added by (or through arrangements made by)
any one entity. If the Document already includes
a cover text for the same cover, previously added
by you or by arrangement made by the same entity
you are acting on behalf of, you may not add an-

other; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added
the old one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do
not by this License give permission to use their
names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version. 5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License, under the terms
defined in section 4 above for modified versions,
provided that you include in the combination all
of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant
Sections of your combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of
this License, and multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there
are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name
but different contents, make the title of each such
section unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher
of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in
the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice
of the combined work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections
Entitled "History" in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications".
You must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements". 6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy
that is included in the collection, provided that you
follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying
of each of the documents in all other respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License
into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document. 7. AGGREGATION WITH
INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives
with other separate and independent documents or
works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution
medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the
legal rights of the compilation’s users beyond what
the individual works permit. When the Document
is included in an aggregate, this License does not
apply to the other works in the aggregate which are
not themselves derivative works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Document, then if the
Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document’s Cover Texts may be placed
on covers that bracket the Document within the
aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of covers
if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise
they must appear on printed covers that bracket
the whole aggregate. 8. TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so
you may distribute translations of the Document
under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant
Sections with translations requires special permission from their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all Invariant Sections
in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include a translation of this
License, and all the license notices in the Document,
and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you
also include the original English version of this License and the original versions of those notices and
disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the
translation and the original version of this License
or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will
prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section
1) will typically require changing the actual title.
9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute
the Document except as expressly provided under
this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute it is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, if you cease all violation of this License,
then your license from a particular copyright holder
is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the
copyright holder explicitly and finally terminates
your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
holder fails to notify you of the violation by some
reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright
holder is reinstated permanently if the copyright
holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have received
notice of violation of this License (for any work)
from that copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the
notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does
not terminate the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under this License.
If your rights have been terminated and not permanently reinstated, receipt of a copy of some or all
of the same material does not give you any rights
to use it. 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be
similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the Document specifies that
a particular numbered version of this License "or
any later version" applies to it, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of
that specified version or of any later version that
has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify
a version number of this License, you may choose
any version ever published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation. If the Document specifies that a proxy can decide which future versions of

this License can be used, that proxy’s public statement of acceptance of a version permanently authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.
11. RELICENSING
"Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site" (or
"MMC Site") means any World Wide Web server
that publishes copyrightable works and also provides prominent facilities for anybody to edit those
works. A public wiki that anybody can edit is
an example of such a server. A "Massive Multiauthor Collaboration" (or "MMC") contained in the
site means any set of copyrightable works thus published on the MMC site.
"CC-BY-SA"
means
the
Creative
Commons
Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 license published by
Creative Commons Corporation, a not-for-profit
corporation with a principal place of business in
San Francisco, California, as well as future copyleft
versions of that license published by that same
organization.
"Incorporate" means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or in part, as part of another Document.
An MMC is "eligible for relicensing" if it is licensed
under this License, and if all works that were first
published under this License somewhere other than
this MMC, and subsequently incorporated in whole
or in part into the MMC, (1) had no cover texts or
invariant sections, and (2) were thus incorporated
prior to November 1, 2008.
The operator of an MMC Site may republish an
MMC contained in the site under CC-BY-SA on the
same site at any time before August 1, 2009, provided the MMC is eligible for relicensing. ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents
To use this License in a document you have written,
include a copy of the License in the document and
put the following copyright and license notices just
after the title page:
Copyright (C) YEAR YOUR NAME. Permission is
granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no
Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is included
in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation
License".
If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts
and Back-Cover Texts, replace the "with . . .
Texts." line with this:
with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and
with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts,
or some other combination of the three, merge
those two alternatives to suit the situation.
If your document contains nontrivial examples of
program code, we recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free software
license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

18.3 GNU Lesser General Public License
GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright © 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
<http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
it is not allowed.
This version of the GNU Lesser General Public License incorporates the terms and conditions of version 3 of the GNU General Public License, supplemented by the additional permissions listed below.
0. Additional Definitions.
As used herein, “this License” refers to version 3
of the GNU Lesser General Public License, and the
“GNU GPL” refers to version 3 of the GNU General
Public License.
“The Library” refers to a covered work governed by
this License, other than an Application or a Combined Work as defined below.
An “Application” is any work that makes use of an
interface provided by the Library, but which is not
otherwise based on the Library. Defining a subclass
of a class defined by the Library is deemed a mode
of using an interface provided by the Library.
A “Combined Work” is a work produced by combining or linking an Application with the Library.
The particular version of the Library with which
the Combined Work was made is also called the
“Linked Version”.
The “Minimal Corresponding Source” for a Combined Work means the Corresponding Source for
the Combined Work, excluding any source code for
portions of the Combined Work that, considered in
isolation, are based on the Application, and not on
the Linked Version.

The “Corresponding Application Code” for a Combined Work means the object code and/or source
code for the Application, including any data and
utility programs needed for reproducing the Combined Work from the Application, but excluding the
System Libraries of the Combined Work. 1. Exception to Section 3 of the GNU GPL.
You may convey a covered work under sections 3
and 4 of this License without being bound by section 3 of the GNU GPL. 2. Conveying Modified
Versions.
If you modify a copy of the Library, and, in your
modifications, a facility refers to a function or data
to be supplied by an Application that uses the facility (other than as an argument passed when the
facility is invoked), then you may convey a copy of
the modified version:
* a) under this License, provided that you make a
good faith effort to ensure that, in the event an Application does not supply the function or data, the
facility still operates, and performs whatever part
of its purpose remains meaningful, or * b) under
the GNU GPL, with none of the additional permissions of this License applicable to that copy.
3. Object Code Incorporating Material from Library Header Files.
The object code form of an Application may incorporate material from a header file that is part of
the Library. You may convey such object code under terms of your choice, provided that, if the incorporated material is not limited to numerical parameters, data structure layouts and accessors, or
small macros, inline functions and templates (ten
or fewer lines in length), you do both of the following:
* a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the
object code that the Library is used in it and that
the Library and its use are covered by this License.
* b) Accompany the object code with a copy of the
GNU GPL and this license document.

4. Combined Works.
You may convey a Combined Work under terms of
your choice that, taken together, effectively do not
restrict modification of the portions of the Library
contained in the Combined Work and reverse engineering for debugging such modifications, if you
also do each of the following:
* a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the
Combined Work that the Library is used in it and
that the Library and its use are covered by this License. * b) Accompany the Combined Work with a
copy of the GNU GPL and this license document. *
c) For a Combined Work that displays copyright notices during execution, include the copyright notice
for the Library among these notices, as well as a reference directing the user to the copies of the GNU
GPL and this license document. * d) Do one of the
following: o 0) Convey the Minimal Corresponding
Source under the terms of this License, and the Corresponding Application Code in a form suitable for,
and under terms that permit, the user to recombine
or relink the Application with a modified version
of the Linked Version to produce a modified Combined Work, in the manner specified by section 6 of
the GNU GPL for conveying Corresponding Source.
o 1) Use a suitable shared library mechanism for
linking with the Library. A suitable mechanism
is one that (a) uses at run time a copy of the Library already present on the user’s computer system, and (b) will operate properly with a modified
version of the Library that is interface-compatible
with the Linked Version. * e) Provide Installation
Information, but only if you would otherwise be required to provide such information under section 6
of the GNU GPL, and only to the extent that such
information is necessary to install and execute a
modified version of the Combined Work produced
by recombining or relinking the Application with
a modified version of the Linked Version. (If you
use option 4d0, the Installation Information must
accompany the Minimal Corresponding Source and
Corresponding Application Code. If you use option
4d1, you must provide the Installation Information
in the manner specified by section 6 of the GNU
GPL for conveying Corresponding Source.)

5. Combined Libraries.
You may place library facilities that are a work
based on the Library side by side in a single library
together with other library facilities that are not
Applications and are not covered by this License,
and convey such a combined library under terms of
your choice, if you do both of the following:
* a) Accompany the combined library with a copy
of the same work based on the Library, uncombined
with any other library facilities, conveyed under
the terms of this License. * b) Give prominent notice with the combined library that part of it is a
work based on the Library, and explaining where
to find the accompanying uncombined form of the
same work.
6. Revised Versions of the GNU Lesser General
Public License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised
and/or new versions of the GNU Lesser General
Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version,
but may differ in detail to address new problems or
concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Library as you received it specifies that
a certain numbered version of the GNU Lesser General Public License “or any later version” applies to
it, you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that published version or of any
later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Library as you received it does not
specify a version number of the GNU Lesser General Public License, you may choose any version of
the GNU Lesser General Public License ever published by the Free Software Foundation.
If the Library as you received it specifies that a
proxy can decide whether future versions of the
GNU Lesser General Public License shall apply,
that proxy’s public statement of acceptance of
any version is permanent authorization for you to
choose that version for the Library.

